---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part42
created: 2025-12-24T20:52:32Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 06b8492b9b75
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part42.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- “If anyone says that to fight doesn’t get you anywhere, that politics can’t make a difference, that all parties are the same, then look what we’ve achieved together since 1997: the winter fuel allowance, the shortest waiting times in history, crime down by a third, the creation of Surestart, the Cancer Guarantee, record results in schools, more students than ever, the Disability Discrimination Act, devolution, civil partnerships, peace in Northern Ireland, the social chapter, half a million children out of poverty, maternity pay, paternity leave, child benefit, the minimum wage, the ban on cluster bombs, the cancelling of debt, the trebling of aid, the first ever Climate Change Act...
      - That’s the Britain we’ve been building together, that’s the change we choose.”
      - Gordon Brown
      - Source: https://www.thelondoneconomic.com/politics/flashback-to-gordon-brown-listing-what-new-labour-achieved-in-government-343980/
  - Prior to the sharp increase in small boat arrivals in late 2018, #kkk
    - such crossings were a rare occurrence. Official figures show a dramatic escalation from just a few hundred individuals in 2018 to tens of thousands in subsequent years, a timeline that coincides with the UK's preparations to leave the EU.
      - ​The crucial element in this development was the UK's departure from the Dublin Regulation. This EU law determined which member state was responsible for examining an asylum application, generally the first country of entry. For the UK, this meant it had a legal framework to request the return of asylum seekers who had transited through other EU countries, such as France. While the number of returns was not exhaustive, the regulation served as a significant deterrent
  - I say to Gottfried how c reome you work for big money but aye still struggling. He says
    - #kkk is a myth that you can get rich by working. You get rich by owning
  - Palantir
    - "it's obvious that Palantir is eager to embrace this close tie with government work and military work, but this is also part of a larger belief that not only should this be Palantir's mission, but also Silicon Valley's larger mission. To that point, Karp wrote a book recently called The Technological Republic. And in this book he laid out the philosophy of technology being created in service of a state, so a techno state. He kind of reminisces about the times when technology and science and governments all came together to defeat a common enemy instead of, "Building things because they can," which is serious shade at, I don't know, a company that makes food delivery apps. He calls for a renewed unit"
      - https://www.wired.com/story/uncanny-valley-podcast-palantir-most-mysterious-company-silicon-valley/#:~:text=it%27s%20obvious%20that,a%20renewed%20unity
  - 
  - eval4just 
    - palestine eval4just coffee time ﻿Wed, Jul 2﻿ 
      - sabrina ceasefire now
        - really glossy monthly report but what/whom for?
      - aida
        - conteacted by some palestinian NGO, voices in media
  - Gaza damage #kkkk
    - there has never been a war in history where 80% of the country has been destroyed, 100% of the population displaced, and 50% of the deaths children.
  - Olympics #kkk
    - the national tables are not official IOC
    - what Team GB actually is. This is not a government agency or a charity. It is the public end of a private company whose highest paid director is on £483,263 according to the latest accounts, which is licensed and monitored at arm’s-length by the government to fulfil its national Olympic body role, to use flags and anthem, and to run and monetise these sports pretty much as it sees fit.
      - The change to Team GB took place in the mid-1990s, as conceived by Marzena Bogdanowicz, the BOA’s then director of marketing, who decided that “we weren’t strong enough as a brand”. That process was sped along by general dismay at winning only one gold medal at Atlanta 1996. This was a poor return. But it was also authentic, an honest reflection of the state of grassroots sport facilities, access and elite coaching
    - in a sense Team GB does at least represent actual GB, only not in the way it thinks. Funding for the few, a fight for resources elsewhere. Does this sound familiar?
  - For many Germans, as Alexander and Margarete Mitscherlich pointed out in their influential 1967 work, The Inability to Mourn, the end of the second world war meant a repression of the suffering of defeat and of the intensity of their attachment to Hitler. It is hard to think that repressed mourning fo
  - UK
    - [Tolpuddle Martyrs - Wikipedia - en.wikipedia.org](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolpuddle_Martyrs)
      - "The Tolpuddle Martyrs were six agricultural labourers from the village of Tolpuddle in Dorset, England, who, in 1834, were convicted of swearing a secret oath as members of the Friendly Society of Agricultural Labourers. They were arrested on charges under the Unlawful Oaths Act during a labour dispute over cut wages before being convicted in R v Loveless and Others and sentenced to penal transportation to Australia.[1][2] They were pardoned in 1836 after mass protests by sympathisers and support from Lord John Russell and returned to England between 1837 and 1839."
  - Trust
    - Polarisation and the V-Dem database [“With me, or against me”: The intensification of political polarization in Latin America and the Caribbean | United Nations Development Programme - undp.org](https://www.undp.org/latin-america/blog/me-or-against-me-intensification-political-polarization-latin-america-and-caribbean) #kkk
      - "Using data from Variety of Democracies (V-Dem), this #GraphForThought looks at what happened to polarization in the region in the last two decades. V-Dem uses survey data to measure if a “society is polarized into antagonistic, political camps” and how this affects social interaction. BUT ==THIS IS JUST EXPERT OPINION. ==It defines societies as highly polarized if supporters of opposing political camps are reluctant to engage in friendly interactions, for example, in family functions, civic associations, leisure activities and workplaces. "
      - 
      - "explain an increase in polarization, we need to distinguish between two phenomena that take place as societies break up into clusters (as defined in the classic paper by Esteban and Ray (1994)): #kkkk
        - identification vis a vis alienation. The more people identify with a given group and the more characteristics they share, the stronger their sense of identification with this group. At the same time, the more they identify with a group, the stronger the sense of distance from others that do not share specific characteristics, understood as alienation"
  - themes
    - Misogyny
      - How did misogyny spread with internet? #kkk
        - No need to account for their witch-hunts or upskirting, they could merely report that people were doing it on the internet.
      - Sad fact about misogyny {{cloze For the first time, in surveys about social attitudes, the youngest cohort surveyed have significantly more extreme misogynist attitudes than the oldest }}
    - How they split us
      - What do you call it when Tories try to copy US with turning consensus on climate change into something political #kkk
        - a wedge issue
          - [ Khelif woman boxer - a global conflict is playing out at the Paris Olympics – just not in the way we think | Nathalie Tocci | The Guardian - theguardian.com](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/article/2024/aug/08/paris-olympics-culture-wars-russia-west)
            - "All hell broke loose after a viral disinformation campaign about Khelif’s gender identity. False claims about Khelif triggered well-meaning (albeit misinformed) expressions of concern for female sports, but mostly an ill-willed campaign to denigrate the IOC, which had accepted Khelif into the women’s competition.

Khelif was born and grew up female. She reportedly has differences in sexual development (known as DSD), but this has never disqualified her from competing in the Olympics. In fact, she participated in the 2021 Games in Tokyo, where she didn’t win a medal.


Olympic boxer in gender eligibility row hits out at ‘bullies’ as IBA doubles down
Read more
It’s true that Khelif was disqualified from competing at the world boxing championships 16 months ago, but that ban was imposed by the Russian-led International Boxing Association (IBA), which also banned the Taiwanese boxer Lin Yu-ting, on the basis of gender-based tests that the IOC has described as lacking credibility.

I’m no expert on boxing regulations, nor on the rules of the IOC, but, as a martial artist myself, this much is clear: once both athletes had entered the ring, the time for contesting gender was over."
    - UBI
      - This article has the proper framing of UBI that advocates should adopt #kkk
        - : as compensation to citizens for the enclosure of our common wealth — this includes land, natural resources, and AIs trained on humanity. Sadly, the title doesn't reflect this: It's not money for nothing, it's dividends to citizens as shareholders.
        - "The concept of a guaranteed basic income might seem novel or neoteric, but it dates back to 1795, when the American founding father #kkk
          - Thomas Paine suggested a “national fund” should pay every adult “rich or poor” a “ground rent” of £10 a year until the age of 50. Earth is “the common property of the human race”, he argued, so everyone has been collectively dispossessed by “the introduction of the system of landed property” and was entitled to compensation."
          - 
    - Marx : “Men make their own history, ... #kkkk 
      - but they do not make it as they please; they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brains of the living. And just as they seem to be occupied with revolutionizing themselves and things, creating something that did not exist before, precisely in such epochs of revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service, borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes in order to present this new scene in world history in time-honored disguise and borrowed language.”
    - violence as a public health problem #kkk
      - glasgow, from USA - Despite the ever-growing evidence, governments are sometimes reluctant to properly invest. “The difficulty is not how to reduce violence – it is the way people understand the problem,” says Slutkin, his frustration visible. He draws a parallel with Aids and the stigma attached to those who contracted it during the first outbreaks in the 80s.
    - "The Overton window #kkk
      - is the range of policies politically acceptable to the mainstream population at a given time.[1] It is also known as the window of discourse" 
      - seems so old fashioned if you see it on a left-right axis
      - [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window#:~:text=The%20Overton%20window%20is%20the%20range%20of%20policies%20politically%20acceptable%20to%20the%20mainstream%20population%20at%20a%20given%20time.%5B1%5D%20It%20is%20also%20known%20as%20the%20window%20of%20discourse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window#:~:text=The%20Overton%20window%20is%20the%20range%20of%20policies%20politically%20acceptable%20to%20the%20mainstream%20population%20at%20a%20given%20time.%5B1%5D%20It%20is%20also%20known%20as%20the%20window%20of%20discourse)
  - Monbiot the invisible doctrine #book
    - Imagine that the people of the Soviet Union had never heard of Communism. #kkk
