---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part52
created: 2025-12-24T20:54:48Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 1421708f46b6
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part52.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- One of his most influential concepts is "thick description," introduced in his seminal essay "The Interpretation of Cultures" (1973). In this work, Geertz distinguishes between a "thin description" of events, which just describes facts, and a "thick description," which seeks to explain the context, meaning, and motivations behind those events. This approach was illustrated through various essays, including his famous analysis of the Balinese cockfight, where he showed how the event was not merely gambling but a deeply meaningful practice intertwined with Balinese social and political life.
    - Rubrics [Florencia Guerzovich](https://workflowy.com/#/621534340136) are an essential part of prompts [genAI in qual](https://workflowy.com/#/1c645c2241f9) 
    - Nan's framework
      - >
      - Evaluation done _**to**_ indigenous peoples serves to marginalise indigenous values and worldviews
      - Evaluation done _**for**_ indigenous peoples may be carried out with virtuous intent and some consultation, but power isn’t meaningfully shared
      - Evaluation done _**with**_ indigenous peoples involves genuine power sharing, combining Indigenous and Western perspectives and priorities
      - Evaluation done _**by**_ indigenous peoples honours indigenous perspectives while still accommodating Western expectations and priorities
      - Evaluation done _**as**_ indigenous peoples involves full indigenous ownership and control of the evaluation, led by indigenous values and worldviews. [⤴️]([https://omnivore.app/me/3-locus-of-power-in-vf-m-assessment-by-julian-king-18c3907a5a1#e1de5f58-49e9-4c9f-b094-179ae0ddad33](https://omnivore.app/me/3-locus-of-power-in-vf-m-assessment-by-julian-king-18c3907a5a1#e1de5f58-49e9-4c9f-b094-179ae0ddad33))
      - > where my [Kinnect Group ]([http://www.kinnect.co.nz/)colleague](http://www.kinnect.co.nz/)colleague) [Nan Wehipeihana]([https://www.linkedin.com/in/nan-wehipeihana-b882521/](https://www.linkedin.com/in/nan-wehipeihana-b882521/)) gave a keynote presentation: _[A Vision for Indigenous Evaluation]([https://communityresearch.org.nz/vision-for-indigenous-evaluation/)._](https://communityresearch.org.nz/vision-for-indigenous-evaluation/)._) Nan presented a framework for reflecting on evaluation practice, for organisations and individuals to assess how they share power and decision-making with indigenous peoples.  #kkk
        - Nan’s framework resonated with me as a clear and memorable way to distinguish between evaluation done _**to**_, _**for**_, _**with**_, _**by**_, or _**as**_ indigenous peoples. These five prepositions describe where the locus of power sits along a continuum from Western to Indigenous power and control. For example:
    - Causal link monitoring
      - half saw a CP presentation by [Heather Britt](https://workflowy.com/#/481ca93a1511) 
    - Impact Log [Jess Dart](https://workflowy.com/#/10a46fbfe321)  
    - causal pathways
      - Title:: Lost Causal: Debunking Myths About Causal Analysis in Philanthropy  #kkkk
        - 
        - Year: 2021
        - tags: Source
        - Authors: Jewlya Lynn, Sarah Stachowiak, Julia Coffman
        - ---
        - URL: https://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/tfr/vol13/iss3/6
        - Zotero Link: [Lynn et al_2021_Lost Causal.pdf](zotero://select/library/items/TGF9KBQN)
        - Yet currently in philanthropy, particularly for strategies and initiatives that feature high complexity, few evaluations use robust techniques for understanding causality. Instead, philanthropic evaluation tends to rely on descriptive measurement and analysis. These descriptions often are rich, meaningful, and in-depth, but they remain merely descriptions nonetheless. This article challenges the myths that hold us back from causal inquiry, allowing us to embrace curiosity, inquiry, and better knowing, even (or especially) if it means learning that our assumptions and theories do not h” Yellow Highlight [Page 2](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=2&annotation=highlight-p2x287y211)
        - complex systems get tested through evaluation. More commonly, foundations commission descriptive studies about these strategies #kkk
          - that feature rich depictions of the context, how strategies were implemented, and any observed changes, but contain little to no causal analysis” Yellow Highlight [Page 3]([zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=3&annotation=highlight-p3x252y309](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=3&annotation=highlight-p3x252y309))
        - d a” Yellow Highlight [Page 4](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=4&annotation=highlight-p4x260y296)
        - understanding that attribution — defnitively isolating whether an outcome would not have happened without a particular efort — is diffcult to impossible to attain in complex and dynamic settings. The standard instead is on contribution and determining whether a credible and plausible case can be made, based on evidence, that causal connections exist. This has led to new thinking on the concept” Yellow Highlight [Page 7](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=7&annotation=highlight-p7x252y541)
        - An example of how causal analysis afected future decisions comes from the Agricultural Research Center for International Development, which sought to help winemakers achieve a geographical designation that they believed would help Brazilian producers increase their income (Blundo-Canto et al., 2020). An impact analysis alone would have shown that the geographical designation was achieved, and that the producers increased their sales and margins. However, a participatory causal analysis explained the mechanism by which income increased — eforts to support learning and motivation across producers led to a virtuous cycle of ongoing learning and increased professionalism, which improved the quality of the wine and increased their income. It was this set of mechanisms, not the geographic designation, that made the difference. The causal analysis also found that the changes experienced by producers made” Yellow Highlight [Page 9](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=9&annotation=highlight-p9x252y46)
        - r example, Jeph Mathias’ approach to outcome harvesting centers the lived experiences of those in the most marginalized parts of complex systems, not just as data sources, but as part of the study team. In Kenya, he engaged street youth as partners in collecting stories, supporting them to learn from their peers and to listen to other system actors. Independent of the external evaluation team, street youth listened to other street youth. They also accompanied evaluation team members to interviews with leaders at UNICEF and Kenya’s Ministry of Youth Afairs, for example. As “insiders,” the youth could hear stories that were inaccessible to the external evaluation team and they could act as “contextual e” Yellow Highlight [Page 11](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TGF9KBQN?page=11&annotation=highlight-p11x252y160)
        - %% Import Date: 2023-07-21T09:04:26.060+01:00 %%
    - Mixed methods  #kkk
      - Bob Williams 
        - One of the things I’ve learned from Critical Systems is that measurement choice is always ideological.  Measurement depends fundamentally how we (think we) observe the world and make sense of it.   Think of the great split in evaluation between those who believe that counting is the way to understand how the world works and those who believe that describing is the way to understand how the world works.  I’ve listened to the arguments for the best part of half a century and ultimately they always boil down to belief.  It even affects those who see the benefits in both.  They call practicing such a position ‘mixed method’. Method? Since when has a belief system been a method?  
    - genAI in qual
      - BECAUSE
        - __(12) (PDF) The BECauSE Corpus 2.0: Annotating Causality and Overlapping Relations__. (n.d.). ResearchGate. Retrieved June 13, 2022, from [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jesse-Dunietz/publication/318739229_The_BECauSE_Corpus_20_Annotating_Causality_and_Overlapping_Relations/links/59af5c7e0f7e9bf3c7239729/The-BECauSE-Corpus-20-Annotating-Causality-and-Overlapping-Relations.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jesse-Dunietz/publication/318739229_The_BECauSE_Corpus_20_Annotating_Causality_and_Overlapping_Relations/links/59af5c7e0f7e9bf3c7239729/The-BECauSE-Corpus-20-Annotating-Causality-and-Overlapping-Relations.pdf) [https://paperpile.com/app/p/58f34742-cb39-0d36-8c77-43bbba262a69](https://paperpile.com/app/p/58f34742-cb39-0d36-8c77-43bbba262a69) identifying causal connections in language. They created a corpus from a selection of newspaper articles in which different kinds of causal claims have been marked up in detail. (1/3 of all sentences were marked as at least partly causal (!))Really interesting from a perspective of trying to set out in any detail the rules about "how to code a causal claim".
        - They encourage coding passages as causal and/or with related but not-quite-causal concepts like before-after and correlation - having fuzzy boundaries about what is or is not causation improved the coding. For causation itself, they distinguish between consequence, motivation and purpose. It is notable that they also needed to include inhibitory causation (the regulations will prevent future crises). For some reason they say you can't have inhibitory "purpose" causes. I wonder if distinguishing between these three would be of any use for QuIP?I wonder if our way of coding inhibition e.g. The cold --> ~going outside captures quite the same idea as inhibition?
        - Hopefully they will now train an NLP bot to do the same.CheersSteve
      - Sia et al. - 2020 - Tired of Topic Models Clusters of Pretrained Word.pdf  #kkk
        - but it's still bag of words
          - Topic models are a useful analysis tool to un- cover the underlying themes within document collections. The dominant approach is to use probabilistic topic models that posit a genera- tive story, but in this paper we propose an al- ternative way to obtain topics: clustering pre- trained word embeddings while incorporating document information for weighted clustering and reranking top words. We provide bench- marks for the combination of different word embeddings and clustering algorithms, and analyse their performance under dimensional- ity reduction with PCA. The best performing combination for our approach performs as well as classical topic models, but with lower run- time and computational complexity. (Page 1)
      - 
      - ChatGPT
        - In just a few generations, the area in which children are allowed to roam unsupervised has shrunk to a fraction of what it used to be. A British study called "One False Move" found that the "home habitat" of the typical 8-year-old has shrunk to  #kkkk
          - one-ninth of its size within a single generation
        - who challenged Kohlberg  #kkkk
          - Carol Gilligan's Ethics of Care: Challenging the male-centric moral development theories of her time, Gilligan's qualitative research introduced the ethics of care as a crucial dimension of moral reasoning, highlighting how gender influences ethical perspectives and judgments.
        - Erving Goffman's  #kkkk
          - ==Dramaturgical ==Analysis: In sociology, Goffman's work, especially "==The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life==," used a dramaturgical metaphor to describe how individuals perform roles in their daily interactions, shaping our understanding of identity and social life as a kind of performance.
        - 
        - Foucault: four innovations  #kkk
