---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part11
created: 2025-12-24T20:45:43Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 415f06a4fcde
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part11.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- each NYTimes article. We collect daily data on these rank-ordered lists for a ≈ 2.5-year period starting from January 1, 2019, to May 30, 2021. In addition, we collect the metadata and text for each article that appears at least once across the two lists (a total of 13508 unique articles). In the second step, we use a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to recover the distribution of topics in each article based on the unstructured text in the entire corpus. Third, we obtain measures of polarization for all the articles in our corpus using the newly developed Large Language Models (LLMs). We validate these LLM-based measures of polarization using a (Page 2)
      - Topic models help researchers organize and provide insights into large collections of unstructured text data. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is the most common topic model, and it models each document (text) as a distribution over topics and each topic as a distribution over words (Blei et al., 2003). This allows documents to be a part of different topics, rather than being separated into discrete groups. LDA models have been (Page 5)
      - Family 0.067 family, home, friend, feel, child, old, mother, love, never, live (Page 5)
      - is the political polarization of news content. Formally, a news article is considered politically polarizing if the content, text, and opinions expressed diverge away from the center and are closer to either of the extreme ends of the ideological spectrum (DiMaggio et al., 1996; Baldassarri and Gelman, 2008). (Page 7)
      - and lack of affiliation problems – we turn to the newly developed Large Language Models (LLMs) to obtain polarization scores and also validate these scores using standard surveys from human raters, whose scores can be considered an objective and true measure of human opinions on the polarization of content but are not scalable when the number of articles/content is high. We describe both approaches below. 3.2.1 LLM Measures of Polarization We used GPT-3.5-turbo, a large language model, to generate polarization scores, and obtained three types of (Page 8)
      - once in the Most emailed and Most shared on Facebook lists in the pre- and post-election periods in Table 5. Interestingly, we see that the articles shared on both channels were less polarized after the elections, though this drop is higher for Facebook (which explains the results from the regression). In summary, at least in this setting, we do not find there was any significant increase in polarization of articles shared on social media after the elections (compared to email). (Page 15)
    - Blei & Rafferty. Dynamic [topic models](https://workflowy.com/#/0573d34bc9cf) 
      - Dynamic Topic Models
      - David M. Blei [BLEI@CS.PRINCETON.EDU](mailto:BLEI@CS.PRINCETON.EDU)
      - Computer Science Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
      - John D. Lafferty
      - worked on corpus of all articles from Science over 100 years, using a different model to predict not only 
    - Title:: Chapter 1: Exploring Methods in Managerial and Organizational Cognition: Advances, Controversies, and Contributions 
      - 
      - Year: 2017
      - tags: Source
      - Authors: Gerard P. Hodgkinson, Kristian J. Sund, Robert J. Galavan
      - ---
      - URL: https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/S2397-52102017002/full/html
      - Zotero Link: [Hodgkinson et al. - 2017 - Chapter 1 Exploring Methods in Managerial and Org.pdf](zotero://select/library/items/RGW9M5VY)
      - other document” Yellow Highlight [Page 1](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=1&annotation=8L7JEPPN)
      - ne products and additional customer resources and services. Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organizatio” Yellow Highlight [Page 1](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=1&annotation=VQ7XLW5C)
      - More than a quarter of century has elapsed since the publication of Mapping Strategic Thought (Huff, 1990)” Yellow Highlight [Page 4](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=4&annotation=WZCLAAKP)
      - To what extent are the MOC research methods that were in vogue in the final decade of the 20th century still relevant as a basis for tackling 21st-century problem” Yellow Highlight [Page 4](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=4&annotation=92LFZJK7)
      - nship behavior. In line with expectations based on t” Yellow Highlight [Page 8](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=8&annotation=U74CYVMZ)
      - emonstrated the relative power of conscious goals versus primed subconscious goals on job performance (see also Latham & P” Yellow Highlight [Page 9](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=9&annotation=4EFQSDR5)
      - other document” Yellow Highlight [Page 1](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=1&annotation=highlight-p1x255y368)
      - ine products and additional customer resources and services. Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organizatio” Yellow Highlight [Page 1](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=1&annotation=highlight-p1x21y91)
      - More than a quarter of century has elapsed since the publication of Mapping Strategic Thought (Huff, 1990)” Yellow Highlight [Page 4](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=4&annotation=highlight-p4x53y387)
      - To what extent are the MOC research methods that were in vogue in the fnal decade of the 20th century still relevant as a basis for tackling 21st-century problem” Yellow Highlight [Page 4](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=4&annotation=highlight-p4x53y212)
      - enship behavior. In line with expectations based on t” Yellow Highlight [Page 8](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=8&annotation=highlight-p8x77y262)
      - emonstrated the relative power of conscious goals versus primed subconscious goals on job performance (see also Latham & Pi” Yellow Highlight [Page 9](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RGW9M5VY?page=9&annotation=highlight-p9x83y237)
      - %% Import Date: 2023-07-25T14:31:33.341+01:00 %%
    - Title:: An introduction to grounded theory with a special focus on axial coding and the coding paradigm  #kkkk
      - 
      - Year: 2019
      - tags: Source
      - Authors: Maike Vollstedt, Sebastian Rezat
      - repeat: spaced every day
      - due_at: 2023-09-12T06:00:00.000+01:00
      - ---
      - URL:
      - Zotero Link: [Vollstedt_Rezat_2019_An introduction to grounded theory with a special focus on axial coding and the.pdf](zotero://select/library/items/EAZZ48CY)
      - discovery and the context of theory justification, which was the prominent scientific method at that time. With their approach to qualitative research, they also go beyond the mere description of phenomena. Originally, the book was written as a book for young researchers. One of its main intentions was to legitimate qualitative research” Yellow Highlight [Page 91](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=91&annotation=highlight-p91x53y551)
      - e soon after their joint publication in 1967, Glaser and Strauss developed grounded theory in different directions and started to argue their own understanding of grounded theory methodology and methods apart from each other in different ways, Glaser primarily on his own, Strauss also together with Juliet Corbin (Glaser 1978; Strauss 1987; Strauss and Corbin 1990). Later, students of Glaser and Strauss further developed the different interpretations of grounded theory methodology so that today there is a second generation of grounded theory researchers, namely Juliet Corbin, Adele E. Clarke, and Kathy Charmaz (Morse et al. 2009). As those further developments of grounded theory resulted in different research methodologies, it has been suggested to talk about grounded theory methodologies in plural or at least to acknowledge that there are numerous modi operandi involving grounded theory methods in different fields of research as well as different national traditions (Mey and Mruck 2011). In Germany, for instance, it is still most common to work with the grounded theory methodology version that was published by Strauss and Corbin in 1990 (German translation from 1996). The second generation’s developments are still hardly no” Yellow Highlight [Page 91]([zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=91&annotation=highlight-p91x53y358](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=91&annotation=highlight-p91x53y358))
      - New data are gathered continuously and new cases are included in the analysis based on their potential contribution to the further development and refinement of the evolving theory. This sampling method is called theoretical sampling. The iterative process of data collection according to theoretical sampling, data analysis, and theory development is continued until new data do not contribute any longer to a substantial development of the theory, i.e. until theoretical saturation is achieved.” Yellow Highlight [Page 92]([zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=92&annotation=highlight-p92x53y479](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=92&annotation=highlight-p92x53y479))
      - The theory that is the product of this process is also referred to as grounded theory. The quality of a grounded theory is not evaluated according to the standard criteria of test theory, i.e. objectivity, reliability and validity, but according to criteria such as credibility, plausibility, and trustworthiness” Yellow Highlight [Page 92](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=92&annotation=highlight-p92x54y432)
      - e overarching goal of grounded theory is to develop theory. Therefore, grounded theory studies may be carried out related to research phenomena or objects, which lack a (sufficient) theoretical fo” Yellow Highlight [Page 92](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=92&annotation=highlight-p92x54y201)
      - e to the origins of grounded theory in the social sciences, the main epistemological interest lies in predicting and explaining behavior in social in” Yellow Highlight [Page 92](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=92&annotation=highlight-p92x54y105)
      - Note that in the fourth edition of the “Basics of qualitative research”, Corbin and Strauss (2015) reduced the coding paradigm to the three main features “conditions”, “actions-interactions”, and “consequences or outcomes”” Yellow Highlight [Page 97](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EAZZ48CY?page=97&annotation=highlight-p97x54y178)
      - %% Import Date: 2023-07-25T14:50:51.685+01:00 %%
  - Omnivore PROCESS ME
    - # Using AI as a Systems Change Tool: Preparing to Facilitate | by Jewlya Lynn | Mar, 2024 | Medium
      - #Omnivore
      - [Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/using-ai-as-a-systems-change-tool-preparing-to-facilitate-by-jew-18e52377543)
      - [Read Original](https://jewlya-lynn.medium.com/using-ai-as-a-systems-change-tool-preparing-to-facilitate-e880096a6109)
      - ## Highlights
      - > ## **What prompts help me explore a systemic issue?**
      - >
      - > Sometimes I like to start with very specific and deep prompts. On an issue where I’m just beginning to wrap my head around it, I tend to start very high level to be careful not to narrow too quickly. However, I always start by asking for a systems change perspective. Sometimes I specifically request a systems dynamic, complexity, and/or social-ecological systems change perspective. Sometimes I’ll ask for the analysis to be undertaken using a specific framework (e.g. Causal Layered Analysis). [⤴️]([https://omnivore.app/me/using-ai-as-a-systems-change-tool-preparing-to-facilitate-by-jew-18e52377543#fae162a1-8afd-4d23-a600-c3c8454cfdf1](https://omnivore.app/me/using-ai-as-a-systems-change-tool-preparing-to-facilitate-by-jew-18e52377543#fae162a1-8afd-4d23-a600-c3c8454cfdf1))  ^fae162a1
      - > ## **Opening prompts**
      - >
