---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part31
created: 2025-12-24T20:50:00Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 4d27986e1c8a
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part31.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- Some have gone so far as to argue that what we call ‘social structure’ only really exists during rituals: think here of families that only exist as a physical group during marriages and funerals, during which times questions of rank and priority have to be worked out by who sits at which table, who speaks first, who gets the topmost cut of the hump of a sacrificed water buffalo, — location: [2682](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2682) ^ref-47696
      - ---
      - But sometimes festivals are moments where entirely different social structures take over, such as the ‘youth abbeys’ that seem to have existed across medieval Europe, with their Boy Bishops, May Queens, Lords of Misrule, Abbots of Unreason and Princes of Sots, who during the Christmas, Mayday or carnival season temporarily took over many of the functions of government and enacted a bawdy parody of government’s everyday forms. So there’s another school of thought which says that rituals are really exactly the opposite. The really powerful ritual moments are those of collective chaos, effervescence, liminality or creative play, out of which new social forms can come into the world. — location: [2685](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2685) ^ref-47401
      - ---
      - In the popular Babylonian story of Semiramis, the eponymous servant girl convinces the Assyrian king to let her be ‘Queen for a Day’ during some annual festival, promptly has him arrested, declares herself empress and leads her new armies to conquer the world. — location: [2697](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2697) ^ref-38850
      - ---
      - even if all monarchies, including ceremonial monarchies, were to disappear, some people would still play at being kings. — location: [2706](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2706) ^ref-5737
      - ---
      - Even in the European Middle Ages, in places where monarchy was unquestioned as a mode of government, ‘Abbots of Unreason’, Yuletide Kings and the like tended to be chosen either by election or by sortition (lottery), the very forms of collective decision-making that resurfaced, apparently out of nowhere, in the Enlightenment. (What’s more, such figures tended to exercise power much in the manner of indigenous American chiefs: either limited to very circumscribed contexts, like the war chiefs who could give orders only during military expeditions; or like village chiefs who were arrayed with formal honours but couldn’t tell anybody what to do.) — location: [2707](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2707) ^ref-24903
      - ---
      - We do not have to choose any more between an egalitarian or hierarchical start to the human story. Let us bid farewell to the ‘childhood of Man’ and acknowledge (as Lévi-Strauss insisted) that our early ancestors were not just our cognitive equals, but our intellectual peers too. — location: [2722](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2722) ^ref-2715
      - ---
      - Folklorists have long puzzled over all the little brigades of people disguised as plants and animals, the Straw Bears and Green Men, who marched dutifully out each spring and autumn into village squares, everywhere from rural England to the Rhodope Mountains of southern Bulgaria: were they genuine traces of ancient practices, or recent revivals and reinventions? Or revivals of traces? Or traces of revivals? — location: [2739]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2739](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2739)) ^ref-36618
      - ---
      - IN WHICH WE DESCRIBE HOW THE OVERALL COURSE OF HUMAN HISTORY HAS MEANT THAT MOST PEOPLE LIVE THEIR LIVES ON AN EVER-SMALLER SCALE AS POPULATIONS GET LARGER In order for these things to become possible, a number of other factors first had to fall into place. One is the very existence of what we would intuitively recognize as discrete ‘societies’ to begin with. It may not even make sense to describe the mammoth hunters of Upper Palaeolithic Europe as being organized into separate, bounded societies, in the way we talk about the nations of Europe, — location: [2763](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2763) ^ref-21516
      - ---
      - What’s more, there is reason to believe that at certain points in their lives, individual men and women often travelled very long distances. — location: [2772](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2772) ^ref-22143
      - ---
      - When forager bands gather into larger residential groups these are not, in any sense, made up of a tight-knit unit of closely related kin; in fact, primarily biological relations constitute on average a mere 10 per cent of total membership. Most members are drawn from a much wider pool of individuals, many from quite far away, who may not even speak the same first languages. — location: [2775](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2775) ^ref-13948
      - ---
      - Similarly, a North American 500 years ago could travel from the shores of the Great Lakes to the Louisiana bayous and still find settlements – speaking languages entirely unrelated to their own – with members of their own Bear, Elk or Beaver clans — location: [2784](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2784) ^ref-3005
      - ---
      - Only much later do we begin to encounter the kind of situation familiar to anthropologists of Amazonia or Papua New Guinea, where a single river valley might contain speakers of half a dozen different languages, with entirely distinct economic systems or cosmological beliefs. Sometimes, of course, this tendency towards micro-differentiation — location: [2810](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2810) ^ref-3186
      - ---
      - But the overall direction of history – at least until very recently – would seem to be the very opposite of globalization. It is one of increasingly local allegiances: extraordinary cultural inventiveness, but much of it aimed at finding new ways for people to set themselves off against each other. — location: [2813](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2813) ^ref-57930
      - ---
      - most people in a given society feel they really ought to be the same in some specific way, or ways, that are agreed to be particularly important; and (2) that ideal can be said to be largely achieved in practice. — location: [2843](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2843) ^ref-58061
      - ---
      - Imagine a society in which everyone is equal before the gods, but 50 per cent of the population are sharecroppers with no property and therefore no legal or political rights. Does it really make sense to call this an ‘egalitarian society’ – even if everyone, including the sharecroppers, insists that it’s really only one’s relation to the gods that is ultimately important? — location: [2851](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2851) ^ref-42622
      - ---
      - to create some sort of universal, objective standards by which to measure equality. Since the time of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Adam Smith, this has almost invariably meant focusing on property arrangements. As we’ve seen, it was only at this point, in the mid to late eighteenth century, that European philosophers first came up with the idea of ranking human societies according to their means of subsistence, and therefore that hunter-gatherers should be treated as a distinct variety of human being. — location: [2854](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2854) ^ref-56821
      - ---
      - We will scrutinize this conventional wisdom in more detail later. For now, suffice to say that while there is a broad truth here, it is so broad as to have very little explanatory power. For sure, only cereal-farming and grain storage made possible bureaucratic regimes like those of Pharaonic Egypt, the Maurya Empire or Han China. But to say that cereal-farming was responsible for the rise of such — location: [2866](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2866) ^ref-65290
      - ---
      - Roughly 6,000 years stand between the appearance of the first farmers in the Middle East and the rise of what we are used to calling the first states; and in many parts of the world, farming never led to — location: [2873](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2873) ^ref-20152
      - ---
      - humans invariably produce more. We are creatures of excess, and this is what makes us simultaneously the most creative, and most destructive, of all species. — location: [2878](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2878) ^ref-56889
      - ---
      - British anthropologist James Woodburn. In the post-war decades Woodburn conducted research among the Hadza, a forager society of Tanzania. He also drew parallels between them and the San Bushmen and Mbuti Pygmies, as well as a number of other small-scale nomadic forager societies outside Africa, such as the Pandaram of south India or Batek of Malaysia.8 Such societies are, Woodburn suggests, the only genuinely egalitarian societies we know of, since they are the only ones that extend equality to gender relations and, as much as is practicable, to relations between old and young. — location: [2886](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2886) ^ref-18536
      - ---
      - Woodburn adds a twist: the real defining feature of such societies is, precisely, the lack of any material surplus. Truly egalitarian societies, for Woodburn, are those with ‘immediate return’ economies: food brought home is eaten the same day or the next; anything extra is shared out, but never preserved or stored. — location: [2896](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2896) ^ref-31796
      - ---
      - in stark contrast to most foragers, and all pastoralists or farmers, who can be characterized as having ‘delayed return’ economies, regularly investing their energies in projects that only bear fruit at some point in the future. Such investments, he argues, inevitably lead to ongoing ties that can become the basis for some individuals to exercise power over others; — location: [2898](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2898) ^ref-41703
      - ---
      - the American indigenous critique, as we described it in Chapter Two, was initially about something very different: the perceived failure of European societies to promote mutual aid and protect personal liberties. Only later, once indigenous intellectuals had more exposure to the workings of French and English society, did it come to focus on inequalities of property. Perhaps we should follow their initial train of thought. — location: [2912](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2912) ^ref-56653
      - ---
      - What matters to Montagnais-Naskapi women, for instance, is not so much whether men and women are seen to be of equal status but whether women are, individually or collectively, able to live their lives and make their own decisions without male interference. — location: [2918](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2918) ^ref-31512
      - ---
      - is almost possible to say the Wendat had play chiefs11 and real freedoms, while most of us today have to make do with real chiefs and play freedoms. — location: [2932](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2932) ^ref-39253
      - ---
