---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part49
created: 2025-12-24T20:54:03Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 5531b4e44e6a
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part49.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- > Today, 40 years after the miners’ strike, the Armstrong memo reveals how MI5 abused its power to help the government win the conflict. The document undermines the official version that the security service’s role was restricted to countering subversion and stopping an attempt to overthrow parliamentary democracy. And it should result in a reassessment of the secret state’s role in a pivotal moment in British history, the outcome of which – Thatcher’s victory over the organised working class – laid the foundations for the country we live in today. [⤴️]([https://omnivore.app/me/for-years-i-suspected-mi-5-interfered-in-the-miners-strike-the-t-18e197d6d1e#cffc67fb-d43d-4a57-b2ac-926019fcedbe](https://omnivore.app/me/for-years-i-suspected-mi-5-interfered-in-the-miners-strike-the-t-18e197d6d1e#cffc67fb-d43d-4a57-b2ac-926019fcedbe))
  - Russia
    - Putin
      - Putin’s need for absolute victory shows that he is aware of it. He remembers how fast communism fell in Europe once a small chain of events created a tidal wave. He is also known to be fond of the symbolism of dates. It is tempting therefore to taunt him with this little reminder: on 17 March 1985, Romania’s brutal dictator, Nicolae Ceaușescu,  #kkk
        - was re-elected with 100% of the votes of the rubber-stamp parliament, which had in turn just been re-elected with nearly 100% of the popular vote. Four years and nine months into his term, revolution toppled his regime, and he was shot dead by his secret police.
          - [Putin had to contrive a ‘landslide’ – because he knows cracks are showing in Russian society | Samantha de Bendern | The Guardian - omnivore.app](https://omnivore.app/stevepowell99/putin-had-to-contrive-a-landslide-because-he-knows-cracks-are-sh-18e51e350bf)
  - Cooperatives [a different way is possible](https://workflowy.com/#/743bd5e22d8c) 
    - [‘In the US they think we’re communists!’ The 70,000 workers showing the world another way to earn a living | Spain | The Guardian - omnivore.app](https://omnivore.app/stevepowell99/in-the-us-they-think-we-re-communists-the-70-000-workers-showing-18f109e83d6)
      - [a different way is possible](https://workflowy.com/#/743bd5e22d8c) 
the Eroski retail chain is part of Mondragón Corporation, the largest industrial co-op in the world. As a fully signed-up member, Fernández co-owns part of the supermarket chain that also employs her. “It feels like mine,” she says. “We work hard, but it’s a totally different feeling from working for someone else.” That sentiment is echoed by Mondragón’s #kkk
        - 70,000 other workers. Made up of 81 autonomous co-operatives, the corporation has grown since its creation in 1956 to become a leading force in the Basque economy. Eroski is one of its most conspicuous manifestations, with 1,645 outlets across Spain. In addition to food, the chain has profitable sidelines in white goods, electronics, insurance and holiday bookings.
Add notes to this highlight...

But the goal is more about creating #kkk
          -  “rich societies, not rich people”.
Add notes to this highlight...

roots lie in a socially engaged form of Catholicism that gained ground in the 1940s, during the early years of the Francoist regime. Its initial champion was a Basque-born cleric named José María Arizmendiarrieta, who, in 1941, arrived in the small town of Arrasate-Mondragón, about 30 miles (50km) south-east of Bilbao.

CancelSave
Seeking a model that reflected their Christian socialist philosophy, they turned to #kkk
            - the Rochdale Pioneers, a group of tradespeople from the Lancashire town who, more than a century before, had established the world’s first co-operative. That venture grew to become today’s Co-operative Group, home to the UK’s fifth biggest food retailer and its largest provider of funeral services. Mondragón’s founders adopted wholesale many of the Pioneers’ core tenets. In their modern-day headquarters, located in a renovated 14th-century tower with a spectacular mountain backdrop, Etxeberria counts off the group’s 10 “basic principles”. The list ranges from the sovereignty of labour and democratic organisation (one member, one vote), to wage solidarity and “social transformation” – which includes reinvesting surpluses to create new jobs, supporting local charities and community development projects, and strengthening the Basque Country’s Euskara language. Top of the list is voluntary and open membership
Add notes to this highlight...

salary differential between the highest and lowest paid workers in Mondragón, for example, remains about six to one;
Add notes to this highlight...

€10.6bn (£9.1bn) in annual revenues; a dozen research and development facilities; a global roster of blue-chip clients; and a diversified sector spread – industry, retail, finance and education.
Add notes to this highlight...

It’s a moot point. Despite their worker-first philosophy, the movement’s leaders are reluctant to denounce the wealth-maximising nature of modern market capitalism. The reason is as simple as it is awkward: Mondragón must actively participate in that same capitalist system for its survival. This tactic of being “in, but not of” the world of mainstream business has seen the Basque-based movement face charges of double standards.
Add notes to this highlight...

membership does not come cheap. To join a co-operative, workers typically put up a one-off payment of about €17,000 each. Plus, just as they are entitled to a share of any profits, so, too, are they liable for any losses.
Add notes to this highlight...

also prove acute, as Fagor Electrodomésticos’s troubled history shows. The fact that all major investment decisions have to be put to the vote can also make Mondragón’s co-operatives less agile than their conventional competitors. And finding financing can be problematic as the private capital markets are effectively closed to them, admits Fagor Arrasate’s Mendieta: “We can’t incorporate external capital into the co-operative’s share capital because we are governed by the principle of ‘one person, one vote’, which no capitalist investor would accept.”
Add notes to this highlight...





Across Europe, at least, the co-operative model is widespread. In Norway, for instance, co-ops have a strong heritage in the social housing sector. Italy’s Emilia-Romagna region boasts a long tradition of industrial co-operatives similar to that of the Basque Country. And, as well as the Co-operative Group, the UK’s #kkk
              - almost 7,000 co-operatives include the mighty John Lewis Partnership, which has a turnover of nearly £10bn. In total, the EU hosts about #kkkk
                - 250,000 co-operatives, providing 5.4m jobs."
  - [Nov delovni zvezek SDE, prva najava: “INCLUSIVE OR RATIONAL PARTICIPATORY EVALUATION?” WP/SDE, Spring/Summer 2024 – Slovensko društvo evalvatorjev - omnivore.app](https://omnivore.app/stevepowell99/nov-delovni-zvezek-sde-prva-najava-inclusive-or-rational-partici-18f0f0b17d0)
    - The theory of collective choice faces a fundamental limitation identified by Arrow’s impossibility theorem. #kkk
      - This theorem states that no aggregation method can perfectly satisfy both inclusivity (reflecting all individual preferences) and rational choice (selecting the most advantageous option for the collective). This conflict highlights the limitations of democratic decision-making.
Add notes to this highlight...
meaning of democracy #kkkk
        - Demos represent the collective body of citizens, who value inclusivity and a diversity of views. Kratos, on the other hand, refers to the practical governance that enables these decisions. Kratos seeks to ensure that choices are coherent, just, and functional, sometimes at the expense of the initial inclusivity and diversity. The tension is evident for instance in debates around freedom of speech on social media platforms. While demos value the free exchange of ideas, kratos necessitate measures to prevent the spread of misinformation or hate speech. [standing in the middle](https://workflowy.com/#/45519f84d306) 

  - 
    - "who asserted that Dickens "issued to the world more political and social truths than have been uttered by all the professional politicians, publicists and moralists put together".#kkk [Politics](https://workflowy.com/#/1f73ba363c92) 
- Methods
  - methods-meta
    - methods-choosing
      - -
  - quant methods
    - pvalue? #kkkk
      - p(D|H0), the probability of the data OR A MORE EXTREME EVENT given the null hypothesis
    - Take the Best heuristic -
      - like a poorman's regression but more intuitive - decision trees. always just one factor at each branching. Use the best first, e.g. sex, one branch terminates, the other gets another factor, etc. these kinds of fast&frugal heuristics will never be better at fitting but will often be better at predicting with a new sample than any regression!
      - tallying (adding up relevant factors) is also good
      - clever psychologist who thinks about natural frequencies, fast heuristics, against universal stats procedures and p values? and also tried to take down Kahneman and Amos? #kkk
        - Gerd Gigerenzer
        - Gigerenzer argued against the portrayal of heuristics as largely flawed and biased approaches to decision-making, which was a central theme in Kahneman and Tversky's work. Instead, he proposed that heuristics are not just simple mental shortcuts that lead to errors, but efficient, ecologically rational strategies that are well-adapted to the structure of environment
    - 1 Backlink
      - statistics probability [quant methods](https://workflowy.com/#/a1fc0fb00ccf) 
  - qual methods
    - Looking for best and worst cases #kkk
      - positive and negative deviance
    - Chopra & Haaland
      - We like the Chopra & Haaland article. We did have a version of Qualia which worked like this but we have found that OpenAI's GPT4 is so good that these functions are conducted by the bot itself as part of its underlying "persona" aka system instructions. So these functions are soft coded in the instructions rather than hard coded as part of the app.
      - The trouble with hard coding this kind of functionality is that it's difficult to make smaller or more subtle changes, whereas with "soft coding" it's possible to just subtly tweak the instructions in human language.
      - What we do have (though we have hardly ever used it) is the ability to link together interviews so that when one interview (section) ends, the interview continues with another interview (section). At the moment this redirection is hard coded, but the interesting part will be to give this decision to another AI. In practice we haven't really needed this functionality either.
      - The "history agent" functionality is a bit different because it can help cut costs by essentially compressing the interview. The new OpenAI Assistants API can do this automatically but it's also something we haven't really needed. We are more interested in working with Llama-3 which is almost free to use and provides a more dramatic cost reduction.
    - causal mapping
      - Perceived Causal Problem Networks: Reliability, Central Problems, and Clinical Utility for Depression  #kkk
        - Klintwall
          - [Lars Klintwall](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/10731911211039281)[](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4931-6033), [Martin Bellander](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/10731911211039281), [Matti Cervin](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/10731911211039281)
          - https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/10731911211039281 (it's a free download)Rick Davies sent this one along, thanks Rick!
