---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part27
created: 2025-12-24T20:49:13Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 6dd896b24cd6
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part27.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- It’s important to remember that Spanish adventurers like Cortés and Pizarro carried out their conquests largely without authorization from higher authorities; afterwards, there were intense debates back home over whether such unvarnished aggression against people who, after all, posed no threat to Europeans could really be justified. — location: [1176](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1176) ^ref-22186
      - ---
      - Even cannibals, the jurists noted, had governments, societies and laws, and were able to construct arguments to defend the justice of their (cannibalistic) social arrangements; therefore they were clearly humans, vested by God with powers of reason. The legal and philosophical question then became: what rights do human beings have simply by dint of being human – that is, what rights could they be said to have ‘naturally’, — location: [1185](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1185) ^ref-29718
      - ---
      - fact that natural law theorists in the seventeenth century fixed on apparently simple societies as exemplars of primordial times – societies like the Algonkians of North America’s Eastern Woodlands, or the Caribs and Amazonians, rather than urban civilizations like — location: [1197](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1197) ^ref-59198
      - ---
      - Such a conclusion would have made obvious common sense for people who assumed that all truly important knowledge had been revealed by God at the beginning of time, that cities had existed before the Flood, and that saw their own intellectual life largely as attempts to recover the lost wisdom of ancient Greeks and Romans. — location: [1203](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1203) ^ref-28263
      - ---
      - First of all, a qualification is in order. A certain folk egalitarianism already existed in the Middle Ages, coming to the fore during popular festivals like carnival, May Day or Christmas, when much of society revelled in the idea of a ‘world turned upside down’, where all powers and authorities were knocked to the ground or made a mockery of. Often the celebrations were framed as a return to some primordial ‘age of equality’ – the Age of Cronus, or Saturn, or the land of Cockaygne. Sometimes, too, these ideals were invoked in popular revolts. — location: [1214](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1214) ^ref-55719
      - ---
      - Early Christianity similarly insisted that all believers were (in some ultimate sense) equal in relation to God, whom they referred to as ‘the Lord’. As this illustrates, the overarching power under which ordinary mortals are all de facto equals need not be a real flesh-and-blood human; one of the whole points of creating a ‘carnival king’ or ‘May queen’ is that they exist in order to be dethroned. — location: [1221](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1221) ^ref-12207
      - ---
      - What makes this especially odd is that no one denies that many European explorers, missionaries, traders, settlers and others who sojourned on American shores spent years learning native languages and perfecting their skills in conversation with native speakers; just as indigenous Americans did the work of learning Spanish, English, Dutch or French. Neither, we think, would anyone who has ever learned a truly alien language deny that doing so takes a great deal of imaginative work, trying to grasp unfamiliar concepts. — location: [1236](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1236) ^ref-3467
      - ---
      - Historians are aware of all this. Yet the overwhelming majority still conclude that even when European authors explicitly say they are borrowing ideas, concepts and arguments from indigenous thinkers, one should not take them seriously. — location: [1247](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1247) ^ref-39717
      - ---
      - We intend to proceed in the opposite direction. We will examine early missionary and travel accounts from New France – especially the Great Lakes region – since these were the accounts Rousseau himself was most familiar with, to get a sense of what its indigenous inhabitants did actually think of French society, and how they came to think of their own societies differently as a result. — location: [1258](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1258) ^ref-38592
      - ---
      - reason why so many key Enlightenment thinkers insisted that their ideals of individual liberty and political equality were inspired by Native American sources and examples. Because it was true. — location: [1266](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1266) ^ref-7364
      - ---
      - The ‘Age of Reason’ was an age of debate. The Enlightenment was rooted in conversation; it took place largely in cafés and salons. Many classic Enlightenment texts took the form of dialogues; — location: [1269](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1269) ^ref-39025
      - ---
      - Biard did not think much of the Mi’kmaq, but reported that the feeling was mutual: ‘They consider themselves better than the French: “For,” they say, “you are always fighting and quarrelling among yourselves; we live peaceably. You are envious and are all the time slandering each other; you are thieves and deceivers; you are covetous, and are neither generous nor kind; as for us, if we have a morsel of bread we share it with our neighbour.” They are saying these and like things continually.’14 What seemed to irritate Biard the most was that the Mi’kmaq would constantly assert that they were, as a result, ‘richer’ than the French. The French had more material possessions, the Mi’kmaq conceded; but they had other, greater assets: ease, comfort and time. — location: [1286](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1286) ^ref-37409
      - ---
      - Sagard was surprised and impressed by his hosts’ eloquence and powers of reasoned argument, skills honed by near-daily public discussions of communal affairs; his hosts, in contrast, when they did get to see a group of Frenchmen gathered together, often remarked on the way they seemed to be constantly scrambling over each other and cutting each other off in conversation, employing weak arguments, and overall — location: [1304](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1304) ^ref-44308
      - ---
      - That indigenous Americans lived in generally free societies, and that Europeans did not, was never really a matter of debate in these exchanges: both sides agreed this was the case. — location: [1324](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1324) ^ref-47194
      - ---
      - Most of us simply take it for granted that ‘Western’ observers, even seventeenth-century ones, are simply an earlier version of ourselves; unlike indigenous Americans, who represent an essentially alien, perhaps even unknowable Other. But in fact, in many ways, the authors of these texts were nothing like us. When it came to questions of personal freedom, the equality of men and women, sexual mores or popular sovereignty – or even, for that matter, theories of depth psychology18 – indigenous American attitudes are likely to be far closer to the reader’s own than seventeenth-century European ones. — location: [1327](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1327) ^ref-32716
      - ---
      - chaos). Seventeenth-century Jesuits most certainly did not share this assumption. They tended to view individual liberty as animalistic. In 1642, the Jesuit missionary Le Jeune wrote of the Montagnais-Naskapi: They imagine that they ought by right of birth, to enjoy the liberty of wild ass colts, rendering no homage to any one whomsoever, except when they like. They have reproached me a hundred times because we fear our Captains, while they laugh at and make sport of theirs. All the authority of their chief is in his tongue’s end; for he is powerful in so far as he is eloquent; and, even if he kills himself talking and haranguing, he will not be obeyed unless he pleases the Savages. — location: [1337](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1337) ^ref-55079
      - ---
      - Wealthy Wendat men hoarded such precious things largely to be able to give them away on dramatic occasions like these. Neither in the case of land and agricultural products, nor that of wampum and similar valuables, was there any way to transform access to material resources into power – at least, not the kind of power that might allow one to make others work — location: [1372](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1372) ^ref-630
      - ---
      - 25 Some Jesuits went further, remarking – not without a trace of frustration – that New World savages seemed rather cleverer overall than the people they were used to dealing with at home (e.g. ‘they nearly all show more intelligence in their business, speeches, courtesies, intercourse, tricks, and subtleties, than do the shrewdest — location: [1423](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1423) ^ref-11377
      - ---
      - Let’s gather together the strands of our argument so far. By the mid seventeenth century, legal and political thinkers in Europe were beginning to toy with the idea of an egalitarian State of Nature; at least in the minimal sense of a default state that might be shared by societies which they saw as lacking government, writing, religion, private — location: [1439](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1439) ^ref-23893
      - ---
      - As we’ve seen, at first neither side – not the colonists of New France, nor their indigenous interlocutors – had much to say about ‘equality’. Rather, the argument was about liberty and mutual aid, or what might even be better called freedom and communism. We should be clear about what we mean by the latter term. Since the early nineteenth century, there have been lively debates about whether there was ever a thing that might legitimately be referred to as ‘primitive communism’. At the centre of these debates, almost invariably, were the indigenous societies of the Northeast Woodlands – ever since Friedrich Engels used the Iroquois as a prime example of primitive communism in his The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State — location: [1448](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1448) ^ref-49747
      - ---
      - IN WHICH WE INTRODUCE THE WENDAT PHILOSOPHER-STATESMAN KANDIARONK, AND EXPLAIN HOW HIS VIEWS ON HUMAN NATURE AND SOCIETY TOOK ON NEW LIFE IN THE SALONS OF ENLIGHTENMENT — location: [1472](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1472) ^ref-5852
      - ---
      - comprised a series of four conversations between Lahontan and Kandiaronk, in which the Wendat sage – voicing opinions based on his own ethnographic observations of Montreal, New York and Paris – casts an extremely critical eye on European mores and ideas about religion, politics, health and sexual life. These books won a wide audience, and before long Lahontan had become something of a minor celebrity. He settled at the court of Hanover, which was also the home base for Leibniz, who befriended and supported him before Lahontan fell ill and died, — location: [1495](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1495) ^ref-61005
      - ---
      - Whereas in their own societies there was no obvious way to convert wealth into power over others (with the consequence that differences of wealth had little effect on individual freedom), in France the situation could not have been more different. — location: [1546](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1546) ^ref-2499
      - ---
