---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part34
created: 2025-12-24T20:50:37Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 74cf6fdebbe9
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part34.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- The second, and largest, faction of near-death researchers were the parapsychologists, those interested in phenomena that seemed to undermine the scientific orthodoxy that the mind could not exist independently of the brain. These researchers, who were by and large trained scientists following well established research methods, tended to believe that near-death experiences offered evidence that consciousness could persist after the death of the individual. Many of them were physicians and psychiatrists who had been deeply affected after hearing the near-death stories of patients they had treated in the ICU. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#0eae9c90-7d84-4d63-9fbb-c272eb25d42e)
      - Finally, there emerged the smallest contingent of near-death researchers, who could be labelled the physicalists. These were scientists, many of whom studied the brain, who were committed to a strictly biological account of near-death experiences. Like dreams, the physicalists argued, near-death experiences might reveal psychological truths, but they did so through hallucinatory fictions that emerged from the workings of the body and the brain. (Indeed, many of the states reported by near-death experiencers can apparently be achieved by taking a hero’s dose of ketamine.) [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#d11698ae-6ca3-4dd9-a726-c13b21129dec)
    - “We really are in a crucial moment where we have to disentangle  #kkkk
      - consciousness from responsiveness, and maybe question every state that we consider unconscious,” she told me. Parnia, the resuscitation specialist, who studies the physical processes of dying but is also sympathetic to a parapsychological theory of consciousness, has a radically different take on what we are poised to find out. “I think in 50 or 100 years time we will have discovered the entity that is consciousness,” he told me. “It will be taken for granted that it wasn’t produced by the brain, and it doesn’t die when you die.” [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#1dd87874-52f0-4e62-8e56-bdb5538cd490)
    - Loss of oxygen to the brain and other organs generally follows within seconds or minutes, although the complete cessation of activity in the heart and brain – which is often called “flatlining” or, in the case of the latter, “brain death” – may not occur for  #k
      - many minutes or even hours.For almost all people at all times in history, cardiac arrest was basically the end of the line. That began to change in 1960, when the combination of  #kkkk
        - mouth-to-mouth ventilation, chest compressions and external defibrillation known as cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR, was formalised. Shortly thereafter, a massive campaign was launched to educate clinicians and the public on [CPR’s basic techniques](https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/27/dr-dillners-dilemma-should-i-learn-cpr-cardiac-arrest), and soon people were being revived in previously unthinkable, if still modest, numbers. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#20034a0f-b994-42d5-90cc-b29a2c497731)
    - In 2019, a British woman named Audrey Schoeman who was caught in a snowstorm spent  #kkkk
      - six hours in cardiac arrest before doctors [brought her back to life](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/dec/05/doctors-in-spain-revive-british-woman-after-six-hour-cardiac-arrest) with no evident brain damage. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#db1262de-8ac2-48d4-8e40-d6ca286bbfaf)
    - order for this argument to hold, something else has to be true: near-death experiences have to happen during death, after the brain shuts down. To prove this, parapsychologists point to a number of rare but astounding cases known as “veridical” near-death experiences, in which patients seem to report details from the operating room that they might have known only if they had conscious awareness during the time that they were clinically dead. Dozens of such reports exist. One of the most famous is about a woman who apparently travelled so far outside her body that she was able to spot a shoe on a window ledge in another part of the hospital where she went into cardiac arrest; the shoe was later reportedly found by a nurse. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#f794e53b-1111-4ecf-99d3-68698c1f3500)
    - At the very least, Parnia and his colleagues have written, such phenomena are “inexplicable through current neuroscientific models”. Unfortunately for the parapsychologists, however, none of the reports of post-death awareness holds up to strict scientific scrutiny. “There are many claims of this kind, but in my long decades of research into out-of-body and near-death experiences I never met any convincing evidence that this is true,” Sue Blackmore, a well-known researcher into parapsychology who had her own near-death experience as a young woman in 1970, [has written](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/sep/19/health.mentalhealth)[⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#edcfec81-735c-4a2a-9ae1-1f2113083860)
    - In other cases, there’s not enough evidence to prove that the experiences reported by cardiac arrest survivors happened when their brains were shut down, as opposed to in the period before or after they supposedly “flatlined”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#13995d31-ba55-4416-acc4-2c0864ea661c)
    - “As she died, Patient One’s brain was functioning in a kind of hyperdrive,” Borjigin told me. For about two minutes after her oxygen was cut off,  #kkk 
      - there was an intense synchronisation of her brain waves, a state associated with many cognitive functions, including heightened attention and memory. The synchronisation dampened for about 18 seconds, then intensified again for more than four minutes. It faded for a minute, then came back for a third time. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#f28abcaf-bdbe-43b5-b5de-8afcf5564a4e)
    - At the very least, Patient One’s brain activity – and the activity in the dying brain of another patient Borjigin studied, a 77-year-old woman known as Patient Three – seems to close the door on the argument that the brain always and nearly immediately ceases to function in a coherent manner in the moments after clinical death. “The brain, contrary to everybody’s belief, is actually super active during cardiac arrest,” Borjigin said. Death may be far more alive than we ever thought possible. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-www-theguardian-com-society-2024-apr-02-new-science-of-dea-18e9d8ec787#2e98bd09-c821-4f35-8e4b-c9d1eda9d1be)
- environment / climate / biodiversity
  - AI energy usage
    - Gpt4 took 25000 A100's for 100 days. An A100 peak TDP is 400W. That maths out to around 24gwh, lets assume theres ~50% overhead and say its 36gwh. Thats roughly equivalent to #kkk
      -  the *home* power consumption of 3000 people for a year, or 0.0000009% of americas residential power consumption for the year
  - ## climate attribution: #kkk
    - [attribution](https://workflowy.com/#/aaf6726a2dda) 
    - X made Y 500% more likely
      - [https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7014505888723927040/?commentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Acomment%3A(activity%3A7014505888723927040%2C7014511883273527296)&dashCommentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_comment%3A(7014511883273527296%2Curn%3Ali%3Aactivity%3A7014505888723927040)](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7014505888723927040/?commentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Acomment%3A(activity%3A7014505888723927040%2C7014511883273527296)&dashCommentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_comment%3A(7014511883273527296%2Curn%3Ali%3Aactivity%3A7014505888723927040))
  - [https://towardsdatascience.com/suvs-are-killing-people-de6ce08bac3d#:~:text=pedestrians.%20A%20March,on%20the%20road.](https://towardsdatascience.com/suvs-are-killing-people-de6ce08bac3d#:~:text=pedestrians.%20A%20March,on%20the%20road.)
    - "pedestrians. A March 2022 study from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) found that pedestrian deaths have increased by 59% since 2009, and 20% of all motor vehicle deaths were pedestrians in 2020. Several factors contribute to these grim statistics, but a big one (pun intended) is the size of vehicles on the road."
  - biomass of mammals: cows vs wild #kkkk
    - all the wild mammals combined weigh 4% of all mammals
    - cows and humans are about a third each
    - 
  - mass #kkk
    - 
  - He argues it is “the opportunity of the century for the meat industry” #kkk
    - to focus on quality rather than churning out as much cheap (and heavily subsidised) meat as possible. And plant agriculture will also remain, he argues.
      - “The future is not powder: the main body of food will still come through plants,” he says. The occasional “salami with the cultural heritage, that can remain. The meat in your lasagne during lunch will be done by cellular agricultur
- Music
  - Richard Thomson Beeswing
    - ana gave it me for xmas
    - kinda just a boring middleclass teenager but he owns up to it
    - really it's about how they were all just copying america (and being successful with it)
    - but ==when Hendrix came they realised how poor they were==
    - but ==Fairport was about finding a nonUS voice==
    - which they did via sandy denny who was already a ballsy star
    - working a lot, already quite famous
    - turned down an invitation to beatles birthday cos they were only a pop band
    - dating a professional groupie then had a band van accident, she died and the drummer
    - he wrote Meet on the Ledge, the first thing they did which I like, it's based on the feel of The Weight by the Band
    - 
  - [Jackson C. Frank - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jackson_C._Frank#:~:text=his%20son%20died%20of%20cystic%20fibrosis%2C)  #kkk
