---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part47
created: 2025-12-24T20:53:36Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 74dcaeb76788
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part47.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- The Conservatives’ Online Safety Act was supposed to address hate speech and provocations of violence on social media, but it achieves the distinction of simultaneously failing to prevent incitement to racial hatred, conflict and riot, and threatening peaceful free speech. When the act is fully implemented next year, its provisions are meant to be enforced by the regulator Ofcom. But Ofcom has already proven incapable of impartial regulation when applied to television channels. Without a legal mandate to do so, it has set blatant double standards, allowing Marshall’s GB News to make a mockery of the broadcasting rules, while continuing to enforce them against less partisan media.
      - Why? #kkk
        - Well the political views of its chairman, Michael Grade, appointed by the Conservatives, might offer a clue. Watching the far-right instigator Laurence Fox on the BBC’s Question Time, Grade said he cheered: “I thought, at last – a voice for those of us who are so sick of the intolerance … the woke brigade.”
    - angry summer uprisings against perceived outsiders are nothing new #kkk
      - . Far from being a heated response to a modern problem, they are as entrenched a part of the English social scene as Ascot, Henley and the Lord’s Test.
        - In 1190 the Jews of York were herded into a castle and killed; in 1263 a further 400 died in a Palm Sunday rampage in London; and in 1290 the entire Jewish population was roughly escorted to the coast and deported. The year 1312 saw race riots against the Flemish weavers who had come, it was said, “onlie to seeke woorck”.
        - In the 1381 Peasants’ Revolt, foreigners were set upon for saying “brod” instead of “bread”, and 100 years later the Steelyard in Blackfriars in London, home to the Scandinavian trade, was ransacked. There were anti-Italian uprisings in 1456-7, and on the night before the May Day holiday of 1517, a 1,000-strong mob in London attacked anybody that looked foreign.
        - Things got even busier after that. Every time people came, fists flew. No room here for the full list, but there have been riots ever since, against all-comers from Cardiff to Notting Hill.
        - It is a shameful thread in the national epic.
        - We should be wary, however, of seeing this only as evidence of irredeemable (as we now say, “institutional”) racism, because it did tend to call forth an equal and opposite counter-reaction. The leaders of the “Evil May Day Riots”, also known as the Ill May Day riots, were executed; Bishop John Jewel replied to protests against the French Huguenots by asking: “Is it so heinous a thing to show mercy?” In some ways, each racist convulsion drew out an anti-racist movement to counter it, which usually outweighed the original splinter groups.
    - 
    - [How the Tory war on immigration backfired | Immigration and asylum | The Guardian - theguardian.com](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2024/jul/01/how-the-tory-war-on-immigration-backfired)
      - "polling shows most voters (once you strip out the “don’t knows”) think illegal migration is larger than legal migration. In fact, #kkk
        - the numbers are not even comparable: an estimated 95% of immigrants are invited in, arriving legally to study, to take up jobs as skilled workers, or in the health and care sectors."
        - but it was New Labour who started this #kkk
          - tough talk about “[false asylum seekers](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/may/24/uk.pressandpublishing)” was often an attempted smokescreen for rising figures of legal migration
    - Did Tory ideas get tried #kkk
      - Neither can it claim we simply weren’t offered the correct brand of rightwing politics. Since 2010, it has offered a rich array of ideologies: David Cameron’s slash-and-burn cuts with social liberal dressing, Theresa May’s national conservatism, Boris Johnson’s tub-thumping rightwing populism, Liz Truss’s ultra-libertarianism, and Rishi Sunak’sconfused culture wars. All have failed. A calamity without precedent, a political project left without defenders – and it is this which presages their looming electoral apocalypse.
      - * Owen Jones
    - why you need further left voices #kkk
      - wasn’t just Brexit or Grenfell that prompted that change of heart in May and Boris Johnson; Farnsworth says it was also the radicalism of Corbyn. “Without a strong leftwing party, politics drifts to the right.”
    - NHS 
      - NHA is not only about universal health care for all, free at the point of use, but about #kkkk
        - [dignity](https://workflowy.com/#/38e9b3eb2cd4) - see play [Nye](https://workflowy.com/#/24d9e309f953) 
    - Murdoch in UK
      - was doing great, switched to Blair because Blair did a speech on his Australian island and did a deal to offer a referendum at least on Euro membership which Major would not, still doing great until phonehacking, Guardian, but nobody cared, Max Mosely (yes it was an orgy but not faschist-themed), Mosely said he would bankroll tom watson, hugh grant etc if they had to pay expenses, still no-one cared until Milly Dowler, parents phoned and realised someone had been listening to msgs, then even Murdoch was humiliated, his own kind of story ...
      - became an outcast, which he hated, so looked for any political ally, up comes Farage.
    - evidence that most uk people are economic socialists [a different way is possible](https://workflowy.com/#/743bd5e22d8c) 
      - Public opinion in the post-Brexit era: Economic attitudes in modern Britain [PDF] By Matthew Elliott & James Kanagasooriam October 2017 Published by the Legatum Institute  Key findings  The findings are based on a landscape poll conducted at the end of the summer by Populus, which indicates that the majority of the British public:  Favour public ownership of the UK’s water (83%), electricity (77%), gas (77%) and railway (76%) sectors (Fig. 3.2a, p.15) Believe taxes should rise to provide more funding for the NHS (Fig. 3.3b, p.19) Support higher levels of regulation (Fig. 3.3a, p.18) Favour wage caps for CEOs (Fig. 3.4a, p.22) Favour worker representation at senior executive and board level (Fig. 3.4a, p.22) Support the abolition of zero hour contracts (Fig. 3.3a, p.18) Hold an unfavourable view of ‘capitalism’ as a concept, viewing it as ‘greedy’, ‘selfish’ and ‘corrupt’ (Fig 3.1a, p. 9) Hold a more favourable view of ‘socialism’ than ‘capitalism’ (Fig 3.1f, p. 12) Commenting on the report, the Legatum Institute’s Matthew Elliott said:  “The findings of our polling are concerning for anyone committed to the principles of free enterprise. Competition entrepreneurship and free trade are all essential to achieving prosperity, not to simply generate profit for businesses, but to extend opportunity to all.From [Public opinion in the post-Brexit era: Economic attitudes in modern Britain](https://www.li.com/activities/publications/public-opinion-in-the-post-brexit-era-economic-attitudes-in-modern-britain)
    - of the 15 wealthy nations surveyed by the ParlGov project, voters in the UK are  #kkk
      - the most left-leaning, yet suffer the most rightwing governments. Sometimes it seems that Labour strategists would rather possess control than power.
        - [A revolution in the way Britain does politics has begun in Devon. Tory MPs should be afraid | George Monbiot | The Guardian - theguardian.com](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/mar/20/revolution-britain-politics-devon-tory-mps-afraid)
    - Paul Marshall / unherd
      - Despite being a proponent of free-market capitalism...
        - Despite being a proponent of free-market capitalism – which he calls “the greatest instrument of poverty relief that the world has ever seen” – he has no time for the individualistic libertarianism proposed by the likes of Ayn Rand or Milton Friedman, and has condemned the employment practices of Amazon.
        - Instead he praises the Victorian philanthropist Joseph Rowntree, and has said that traditional British liberalism “rests on the Judaeo-Christian understanding that we are all, in moral terms, fallen creatures”.
        - Marshall’s modern interpretation of that tradition involves opposing “progressivism”, “woke bureaucrats” and corporate lobbyists. It also means fighting “cancel culture” – especially after his son Winston quit as Mumford & Sons’ banjo player after endorsing a book that criticised anti-fascist groups.
      - Alamy
        - Alamy
        - Marshall does not follow a musty version of Anglicanism where fundraising means holding a cake sale in aid of church organ repairs. He worships at Holy Trinity, Brompton (“HTB”), an influential parish church in Knightsbridge, in the borough of Kensington and Chelsea, south-west London..
        - HTB – which recently pushed back against plans for the Church of England to bless same-sex relationships – is the centre of C of E evangelicalism and the former church of the Archbishop of Canterbury. It also gave birth to the wildly successful Alpha course, responsible for converting millions of people around the world to Christianity – and for encouraging talking in tongues. One of those who found faith through the course was the adventurer Bear Grylls, an occasional attendee at HTB, who last week baptised Brand in the Thames.
      - # Loud and uncowed: how UnHerd owner Paul Marshall became Britain’s newest media mogul | Media | The Guardian
      - #Omnivore
      - [Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/loud-and-uncowed-how-un-herd-owner-paul-marshall-became-britain--18da7fcb184)
      - [Read Original](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2023/oct/28/loud-and-uncowed-how-unherd-owner-paul-marshall-became-britains-newest-media-mogul)
      - ## Highlights
      - > on [UnHerd’s YouTube channel]([https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMxiv15iK%5FMFayY%5F3fU9loQ](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMxiv15iK%5FMFayY%5F3fU9loQ)), along with other interviews, usually fronted by CEO and editor-in-chief Freddie Sayers. The YouTube channel has nearly 370,000 subscribers –  #kkkk
        - about four times the figure for the New Statesman, and 50,000 more than that of the Spectator, the two legacy options for people looking for political commentary. [⤴️]([https://omnivore.app/me/loud-and-uncowed-how-un-herd-owner-paul-marshall-became-britain--18da7fcb184#d7e3a0ee-06bd-45c1-9bbb-5dac6b0106b7](https://omnivore.app/me/loud-and-uncowed-how-un-herd-owner-paul-marshall-became-britain--18da7fcb184#d7e3a0ee-06bd-45c1-9bbb-5dac6b0106b7))  ^d7e3a0ee
      - > Perhaps the most intriguing person involved with UnHerd is its founder and publisher, [Sir Paul Marshall](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2023/sep/27/us-billionaire-ken-griffin-in-talks-over-bid-to-buy-telegraph-led-by-gb-news-co-owner-paul-marshall). Marshall is the co-founder and chairman of Marshall Wace Asset Management, one of Europe’s biggest hedge fund groups. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/loud-and-uncowed-how-un-herd-owner-paul-marshall-became-britain--18da7fcb184#30446ace-435f-4573-94e9-b671e65e1ed2)  ^30446ace
      - > Marshall is now [reportedly looking to add  #kkk
        - the Daily Telegraph and the Spectator]([https://www.theguardian.com/media/2023/sep/27/us-billionaire-ken-griffin-in-talks-over-bid-to-buy-telegraph-led-by-gb-news-co-owner-paul-marshall](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2023/sep/27/us-billionaire-ken-griffin-in-talks-over-bid-to-buy-telegraph-led-by-gb-news-co-owner-paul-marshall)) to his media portfolio – aided by the US hedge fund manager Ken Griffin, one of the Republicans’ biggest and richest donors.
      - >
