---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part26
created: 2025-12-24T20:49:03Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 8e31fc3d0543
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part26.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- in 1956 she abandoned the Yanomami to seek her natal family and live again in ‘Western civilization,’ only to find herself in a state of occasional hunger and constant dejection and loneliness. After a while, given the ability to make a fully informed decision, Helena Valero decided she preferred life among the Yanomami, and returned to live with them.27 Her story is by no means unusual. — location: [953](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=953) ^ref-19129
      - ---
      - Among the most eloquent commentaries on this whole phenomenon is to be found in a private letter written by Benjamin Franklin to a friend:  #kkk
        - When an Indian Child has been brought up among us, taught our language and habituated to our Customs, yet if he goes to see his relations and make one Indian Ramble with them there is no persuading him ever to return, and that this is not natural merely as Indians, but as men, is plain from this, that when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoner young by the Indians, — location: [963]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=963](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=963)) ^ref-1567
      - ---
      - Some emphasized (reasons give for preferring native american life)  #kkkk
        - the virtues of freedom they found in Native American societies, 
        - including sexual freedom, 
        - but also freedom from the expectation of constant toil in pursuit of land and wealth.31 
        - Others noted the ‘Indian’s’ reluctance ever to let anyone fall into a condition of poverty, hunger or destitution. It was not so much that they feared poverty themselves, but rather that they found life infinitely more pleasant in a society where no one else was in a position of abject misery (perhaps much as Oscar Wilde declared he was an advocate of socialism because he didn’t like having to look at poor people or listen to their stories). — location: [975]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=975](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=975)) ^ref-7675
      - ---
      - having to speculate about what precisely those things might be. In fact, anthropology provides endless illustrations of how valuable objects might travel long distances in the absence of anything that remotely resembles a market economy. — location: [1020]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1020](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1020)) ^ref-37209
      - ---
      - examples of exchange of goods which were not "trade"
        - dangerous seas in outrigger canoes, just in order to exchange precious heirloom arm-shells and necklaces for each other (each of the most important ones has its own name, and history of former owners) – only to hold it briefly, then pass it on again to a different expedition from another island. Heirloom treasures circle the island chain eternally, crossing hundreds of miles of ocean, arm-shells and necklaces in opposite directions. To an outsider, it seems senseless. To the men of the Massim it was the ultimate adventure, and nothing could be more important than to spread one’s name, in this fashion, to places one had never seen. Is this ‘trade’? Perhaps, but it would bend to breaking point our ordinary understandings of what that word means. — location: [1024]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1024](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1024)) ^ref-54117
        - often find such regional networks developing largely for the sake of creating friendly mutual relations, or having an excuse to visit one another from time to time; — location: [1032]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1032](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1032)) ^ref-34375
        - Let’s list just a few, all drawn from North American material, to give the reader a taste of what might really be going on when people speak of ‘long-distance interaction spheres’ in the human past:  #kkk
          - 
          - Dreams or vision quests: among Iroquoian-speaking peoples in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was considered extremely important literally to realize one’s dreams. — location: [1034]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1034](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1034)) ^ref-61723
          - Women’s gambling: women in many indigenous North American societies were inveterate gamblers; the women of adjacent villages would often meet to play dice or a game played with a bowl and plum stone, and would typically bet their shell beads or other objects of personal adornment as the stakes. — location: [1047]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1047](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1047)) ^ref-36555
      - a new science of history, one that restores our ancestors to their full humanity. Rather than asking how we ended up unequal, we will start by asking  #kkk
        - how it was that ‘inequality’ became such an issue to begin with, then gradually build up an alternative narrative that corresponds more closely to our current state of knowledge. If humans did not spend 95 per cent of their evolutionary past in tiny bands of hunter-gatherers, what were they doing all that time? — location: [1056]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1056](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1056)) ^ref-7287
      - ---
      - Intellectual historians have never really abandoned the Great Man theory of history. They often write as if all important ideas in a given age can be traced back to one or other extraordinary individual – whether Plato, Confucius, Adam Smith or Karl Marx – rather than seeing such authors’ writings as particularly brilliant interventions in debates that were already going on in taverns or dinner parties or public gardens (or, for that matter, lecture rooms), but which otherwise might never have been written down. — location: [1083]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1083](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1083)) ^ref-57169
      - ---
      - All this applies to Rousseau. Intellectual historians sometimes write as if Rousseau had personally kicked off the debate about social inequality with his 1754 Discourse on the Origin and the Foundation of Inequality Among Mankind. In fact, he wrote it to submit to an essay contest on the subject. — location: [1090](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1090) ^ref-39948
      - ---
      - In March 1754, the learned society known as the Académie des Sciences, Arts et Belles-Lettres de Dijon announced a national essay competition on the question: ‘what is the origin of inequality among men, and is it authorized by natural law?’ What we’d like to do in this chapter is ask: why is it that a group of scholars in Ancien Régime France, hosting a national essay contest, would have felt this was an appropriate question in the first place? The way the question is put, after all, assumes that social inequality did have an origin; that is, it takes for granted that there was a time when human beings were equals – and that something then happened to change this situation. That is actually quite a startling thing for people — location: [1094](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1094) ^ref-42537
      - ---
      - Suddenly, a few of the more powerful European kingdoms found themselves in control of vast stretches of the globe, and European intellectuals found themselves exposed, not only to the civilizations of China and India but to a whole plethora of previously unimagined social, scientific and political ideas. The ultimate result of this flood of new ideas came to be known as the ‘Enlightenment’. — location: [1116](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1116) ^ref-25148
      - ---
      - case of Leibniz: over the course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, European governments gradually came to adopt the idea that every government should properly preside over a population of largely uniform language and culture, run by a bureaucratic officialdom trained in the — location: [1128](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1128) ^ref-19619
      - ---
      - liberal arts whose members had succeeded in passing competitive exams. It might seem surprising that they did so, since nothing remotely like that had existed in any previous period of European history. Yet it was almost exactly the system that had existed for centuries in China. — location: [1130](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1130) ^ref-6982
      - ---
      - in this case, particularly in the Eastern Woodlands of North America. What’s more, a lot of those conversations make reference to arguments that took place between Europeans and indigenous Americans about the nature of freedom, equality or for that matter rationality and revealed religion – indeed, most of the themes that would later become central to Enlightenment political thought. Many influential Enlightenment thinkers did in fact claim that some of their ideas on the subject were directly taken from Native American sources — location: [1140](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1140) ^ref-23612
      - ---
      - well be seen as a form of Western arrogance in its own right. There is no contesting that European traders, missionaries and settlers did actually engage in prolonged conversations with people they encountered in what they called the New World, and often lived among them for extended periods of time – even as they also colluded in their destruction. — location: [1149](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1149) ^ref-41635
      - ---
      - a growing number of American scholars, most themselves of indigenous descent, have challenged these assumptions.5 Here we follow in their footsteps. Basically, we are going to retell the story, starting from the assumption that all parties to the conversation between European colonists and their indigenous interlocutors were adults, and that, at least occasionally, they actually listened to each other. — location: [1155](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1155) ^ref-51087
      - ---
      - indigenous Americans – confronted with strange foreigners – gradually developed their own, surprisingly consistent critique of European institutions, but that these critiques came to be taken very seriously in Europe itself. Just how seriously can hardly be overstated. For European audiences, the indigenous critique would come as a shock to the system, revealing possibilities for human emancipation that, once disclosed, could hardly be ignored. — location: [1160](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1160) ^ref-57341
      - ---
      - our standard historical meta-narrative about the ambivalent progress of human civilization, where freedoms are lost as societies grow bigger and more complex – was invented largely for the purpose of neutralizing the threat of indigenous critique. — location: [1165](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1165) ^ref-32488
      - ---
      - Even in the Garden of Eden, as the thirteenth-century philosopher Thomas Aquinas observed, Adam clearly outranked Eve. ‘Social equality’ – and therefore, its opposite, inequality – simply did not exist as a concept. A recent survey of medieval literature by two Italian scholars in fact finds no evidence that the Latin terms aequalitas or inaequalitas or their English, French, Spanish, German and Italian cognates were used to describe social relations at all before the time of Columbus. — location: [1168](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1168) ^ref-15225
      - ---
