---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part35
created: 2025-12-24T20:50:49Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 950f8e95f4b5
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part35.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- "During his hospital stay he was introduced to music when a teacher, Charlie Castelli, brought Frank an acoustic guitar to keep him occupied during the recovery. He was influenced greatly by Elvis Presley as a teenager.[8] In 1957, he traveled to Memphis, Tennessee with his mother to meet Elvis at a meet-and-greet event for the children injured in the Cleveland Hill fire.[9] In 1961, he enrolled at Gettysburg College and began studying journalism, but his studies were cut short as he dropped out after a year.[10] When he was 21, he received an ==insurance payout== of $110,500 ($1,043,000 today) for his injuries, enough for him to move to England.[5]Debut albumeditHis eponymous 1965 album, Jackson C. Frank, was produced by ==Paul Simon ==while the two of them were living in England immersed in the burgeoning local folk scene.[2] The album was recorded in six hours at Levy's Recording Studio, located at 103 New Bond Street in London.[11] Frank was so shy during the recording that he asked to be shielded by screens so that Paul Simon, Art Garfunkel, and Al Stewart could not see him, claiming: 'I can't play. You're looking at me.' The best-known track from the sessions, "==Blues Run the Game==", was covered by Simon and Garfunkel, and later by Wizz Jones,[12] Counting Crows, John Mayer, Mark Lanegan, Colin Meloy, Bert Jansch, Eddi Reader, Laura Marling, and Robin Pecknold (as White Antelope), while Nick Drake also recorded it privately. The song was also heard in the 2018 film The Old Man & the Gun, while his song "==Milk and Honey==" was heard in the 2003 film The Brown Bunny. "Milk and Honey" was also covered by== Fairport Convention, Nick Drake, and Sandy Denny==, whom he dated for a while.[2] During their relationship, Jackson convinced Sandy to give up her nursing profession to concentrate on music full time."
    - "his son died of cystic fibrosis,"
    - got shot in the eye
- Films/plays/books/poems
  - GMH wildness #kkkkk 
    - what would the world be, once bereft,
    - of wet and of wildness, Let them be left,
    - O let them be left, wildness and wet,
    - Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet
  - Actors from PortTalbot #kkk
    - SHEEN says he was oblivious to struggle because he was so driven by his own dreams. First, it was football. By his mid-teens it was acting. West Glamorgan Youth Theatre, which he calls “one of the best youth theatres in the world”, was on his doorstep. “The miners’ strike was on when I was 15 in Port Talbot and I wasn’t really aware of it at the time. That’s how blinkered I was, because I was so obsessed by acting at that point.” Acting wasn’t regarded as a lofty fantasy in Port Talbot as it may have been in many working-class communities. After all, the town had produced== Richard Burton and Anthony Hopkins==.
  - origin of sound of silence #kkk
    - struggling young singer-songwriter in 1960s Queens, New York, Paul Simon would often retreat to his parents’ bathroom. There, with the tiling giving the room an echo and the sound of running taps generating white noise, he’d sit strumming his guitar in the dark. This experience inspired The Sound of Silence – Simon and Garfunkel’s first US No 1 – and one of pop’s most memorable opening couplets: “Hello darkness my old friend / I’ve come to talk with you again.”
      - “The Sound of Silence was the first song I wrote which seemed to come from some place that I didn’t inhabit,” says Simon, now 82,
  - "Liebes Leben  Konstantin Wecker #kkk
    - Songtext
    - Liebes Leben, fang mich ein, halt mich an die Erde.
    - Kann doch, was ich bin, nur sein, wenn ich es auch werde.
    - Gib mir Tränen, gib mir Mut, und von allem mehr.
    - Mach mich böse, mach mich gut, nur nie ungefähr.
    - Liebes Leben, abgemacht?
    - Darfst mir nicht verfliegen.
    - Hab noch so viel Mitternacht sprachlos vor mir liegen."
    -  https://wecker.de/portfolio-item/liebes-leben#:~:text=Liebes%20Leben,vor%20mir%20liegen.
  - wb yeats
    - "When you are old and grey and full of sleep,
      - And nodding by the fire, take down this book,
      - And slowly read, and dream of the soft look
      - Your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep;
      - How many loved your moments of glad grace,
      - And loved your beauty with love false or true,
      - But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you,
      - And loved the sorrows of your changing face;
      - And bending down beside the glowing bars,
      - Murmur, a little sadly, how Love fled
      - And paced upon the mountains overhead
      - And hid his face amid a crowd of stars"
      -  https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/43283/when-you-are-old#:~:text=When%20you%20are%20old%20and,amid%20a%20crowd%20of%20stars
  - [Charles Dickens - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Dickens#:~:text=Karl%20Marx%20asserted%20that%20Dickens%20%22issued%20to%20the%20world%20more%20political%20and%20social%20truths%20than%20have%20been%20uttered%20by%20all%20the%20professional%20politicians%2C%20publicists%20and%20moralists%20put%20together%22.%5B210) 
    - And the tale of two cities Dickens madam defarge is actually knitting #kkk
      - details of people who need to be remembered
    - "who asserted that Dickens "issued to the world more political and social truths than have been uttered by all the professional politicians, publicists and moralists put together".#kkk [Politics](https://workflowy.com/#/1f73ba363c92) 
      - Karl Marx 
    - "Walking the streets (particularly around London) formed an integral part of his writing life, stoking his creativity. Dickens was known to regularly walk #kkk
      - at least a dozen miles (19 km) per day, and once wrote, "If I couldn't walk fast and far, I should just explode and perish."[195"
    - "Born in Portsmouth, Dickens left school #kkk
      - at age 12 to work in a boot-blacking factory when/because his father John was incarcerated in a debtors' prison. After three years, he returned to school before beginning his literary career as a journalist. Dickens edited a weekly journal for 20 years; wrote 15 novels, five novellas, hundreds of short stories and nonfiction articles; lectured and performed readings extensively; was an indefatigable letter writer; and campaigned vigorously for children's rights, education, and other social reforms. Dickens's literary success began with the 1836 serial publication of #kkk
        - The Pickwick Papers, a publishing phenomenon—thanks largely to the introduction of the character Sam Weller in the fourth episode—that sparked Pickwick merchandise and spin-offs. Within a few years, Dickens had become an international literary celebrity"
  - Nye
    - 
    - 
      - [dignity](https://workflowy.com/#/38e9b3eb2cd4) - see play [Nye](https://workflowy.com/#/24d9e309f953) 
    - saw it with Neil and chris with michael sheen, live streaming from National theatre, moving
- History
  - neanderthals #kkkkk 
    - 
    - And to think about the first two skeletons in Iraq were that they were both quite severely injured and the hypothesis is that people were looking after them
    - But they had fire there already
    - And there's this cave in France which neanderthals used 175,000 years ago and made a kind of a circle out of the stalactites in stalagmites and they say it's the world's oldest construction
    - The famous cave in Kurdistan opened up by the archaeologist solecki where they were a couple of specimens and number four saldana. Maybe number four was the one that supposed to have been buried with flowers but now they're not sure about that and then they couldn't excavate for decades because of wars. I guess it's now in Iraq but then a new team discovered and you skeleton are the woman and they showed a pair of Dutch twins who do amazing reconstructions off the head
    - What I learnt about neanderthals from the BBC and Netflix program I just watched while they were dominant in Europe before sapiens. Were dominant anyway and then encountered sapiens as they moved out of Africa in the I think last Ice age and possibly the fact that the neander tools could no longer surprise hunt. Large animals in what was now becoming tundra around the Mediterranean and Gibraltar, for example where there were many of them could have contributed
  - Stephen's motor car in Cleveland. #kkk
    - He invented also a drum brake having recognised that ford cars didn't have adequate braking and was able to sell his aftermarket kits worldwide and was very successful with it, his car was entirely locally sourced and has had no major parts replaced, including tyres
  - stonehenge altar stone #kkk
    - astonishing finding that the megalith, which is known as the “altar stone”, was transported by prehistoric people from at least as far as present day Inverness, and potentially from the Orkney islands, “doesn’t just alter what we think about Stonehenge, it alters what we think about the whole of the late Neolithic”, said Rob Ixer, an honorary senior research
  - Yugoslavia
    - 
    - 
      - "In 1991, the great Red Star Belgrade of Savićević, Prosinečki and Pančev won the European Cup, defeating a Marseille team featuring stars such as Jean-Pierre Papin, Abedi Pele and Chris Waddle. In terms of football in the Balkans, it is quite probably their finest hour" [Yugoslavia](https://workflowy.com/#/87e949eedd69) 
  - UK/US blame for heroin trade in c asia
    - As the Soviet-Afghan war wound down between 1989 and 1992, the Washington-led alliance essentially abandoned the country, failing either to sponsor a peace settlement or finance reconstruction
    - https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jan/09/how-the-heroin-trade-explains-the-us-uk-failure-in-afghanistan
  - tudjman was a holocaust denier
  - dark ages years 530 ad #kkk
    - massive volcanic eruptions in late 535 and early 536 – possibly in Iceland – sent plumes of ash into the atmosphere, blanketing the sun and leading to a sudden drop in temperature. It has been suggested that another massive eruption in 540 not only lengthened the disaster, but also contributed to the decline of the Mayan civilisation.From [You think 2018 is the worst year ever? Try the real dark age: 536 | Kate Williams | Opinion | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/nov/23/2018-worst-year-ever-536-world-sun)
  - Haeckels' tree of vertebrates 1879 #kk
    - 
  - Sir David Attenborough investigates the discovery of a lifetime: the giant skull of a prehistoric sea monster, known as a pliosaur – the Tyrannosaurus rex of the seas!  #k
    - some guy found the snout of the monster in kimmeridge bay in dorset, so other guys dug out the whole skull from halfway down the cliff
  - timelines
    - everything  #kkkk
      - universe: 14B
      - earth: 4.5B
      - life: 4B
      - vertebrates: 0.5B
      - 
    - Life  #kkkkk
      - single cells 4B
      - photosynthesis 3.5B
      - eukarotes (cells with nucleus): 2B
      - multicellular: 1.5B
      - dinosaurs 250M
      - flowers, mammals: 200M
      - 
    - Hominim timeline #kkkkk  
      - First homini  
        - 5 M
      - First homo  
        - 3 M it is a genus (now monotypic)
      - First fire   
        - 1.5 M
      - Neanderthals   
        - 0.5 M
      - Homo sapiens  #kkk
        - 250 K years ago
      - Earliest sapiens rock art  #kkk
        - 75 K 
      - 
  - 
  - Ashraf Marwan, #kkk 
    - Only man to be a national hero in both israel and egypt  
      - egyptian, married Nasser's daughter, worked for him and his successor Sadat, made billions on the side in arms trade, brilliant, strategically negotiated for egypt with libya, maybe gave israel deliberately 95% true info
  - [Gilgamesh - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilgamesh#:~:text=Akkadian%20Epic%20of%20Gilgamesh%20was,Iliad%20and%20the%20Odyssey%2C)
    - "Akkadian Epic of Gilgamesh was composed by a scribe named Sîn-lēqi-unninni, probably during the Middle Babylonian Period  #kkk
