---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part02
created: 2025-12-24T20:43:14Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: 95da715bd0df
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part02.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- Quantities capable of concatenation are known as **extensive** quantities and include **mass, time, electrical resistance and plane angle**. These are known as base quantities in physics and metrology.  Temperature is a quantity for which there is an absence of concatenation operations. We cannot pour a volume of water of temperature 40 °C into another bucket of water at 20 °C and expect to have a volume of water with a temperature of 60 °C. **Temperature is therefore an intensive quantity. ** Psychological attributes, like temperature, are considered to be intensive as no way of concatenating such attributes has been found. But this is not to say that such attributes are not quantifiable. The theory of conjoint measurement provides a theoretical means of doing this.  TheoryFrom [Theory of conjoint measurement - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_conjoint_measurement)
    - shiny app for auto analysis of dataset
      - Radiant
      - https://vnijs.shinyapps.io/radiant/?SSUID=9adda870a3
    - [Amazon.com](http://amazon.com/): Foundations of Measurement Volume I: Additive and Polynomial Representations (Dover Books on Mathematics) (9780486453149): David H. Krantz, R. Duncan Luce, Patrick Suppes, Amos Tversky: Books
    - [https://www.amazon.com/Foundations-Measurement-Polynomial-Representations-Mathematics/dp/0486453146/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1540810003&sr=1-1&keywords=Foundations+of+Measurement&dpID=51yzGM4qkDL&preST=_SY291_BO1,204,203,200_QL40_&dpSrc=srch](https://www.amazon.com/Foundations-Measurement-Polynomial-Representations-Mathematics/dp/0486453146/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1540810003&sr=1-1&keywords=Foundations+of+Measurement&dpID=51yzGM4qkDL&preST=_SY291_BO1,204,203,200_QL40_&dpSrc=srch)
    - IFRC /ebola? #k
      - http://www.dw.com/en/red-cross-reports-major-fraud-during-west-africa-ebola-outbreak/a-41239730
    - Indigenous peoples / biodiversity
      - are custodians of 80% of the world's [#biodiversity](https://twitter.com/hashtag/biodiversity?src=hash)?
    - think of the way there was never a truth about the past, who said what, but video changed that
    - principles-focused eval - at eval17 with MQP, Kate McKegg,
      - find out what are the projects guiding, ?effective? principles. everyone teary-eyed. What if there is a conflict? I asked could you do it for a tobacco industry client?
      - GUIDE - a principle has to be guiding, useful, inspiring, developmental and evaluable
      - each can have rubrics
      - MQPs input was harder, more interesting
    - evaluability -
      - it's the bit of the inception report where you see if aims and actual outcomes, indicators are in line -
      - some people treat Eval assessment EA as like a method on its own, pixie dust.
      - Debra J Rog initiated it? Mathew Vargese xppl was there, unicef ex ifrc, interesting.
    - Notes on "through the language glass" a book by Guy Deutscher
      - who discovered black white red
      - colour boundaries are arbitrary?
      - Sapir Whorf
      - .
      - languages are equally complex?
      - complex society=compelx words?
      - simpler societies
      - Contact between cultures
      - subordinate clauses
      - first empirical student of lang?
      - "we must be on our guard in both respects if our logic is not to lead to a false metaphysic"
      - Chapter 7 is the great one about their geocentric and egocentric directions after a long introduction these were also the people who use the word kangaroo and there was some dispute about whether they actually use that word for that animal. So this language does not use any egocentric words at all like left or right but only use compass directions they will use hand gestures to represent compass directions even when discussing for example how to find a certain aisle in a supermarket whereby the hand gesture will point to the actual compass direction which you need in the shop rather than how you would find that thing in relation to your body as you walk into the shop, something which is quite surprising. They will even say things like on the south side of your face or your on your north-east cheek it turns out out. It turns out that there are quite a few other languages which have none or very restricted egocentric language.
      - left and right in lang dev
      - how many genders
      - why is a rocket a vegetable
      - does gender make a diff in european langs
      - what if we had smell swatches
      - first social anthropologist
      - no colour words in Homer?
    - what is triangulation ? cosine?
      - when you want to make maps it is much easier to measure angles and distances so you measure one distance very accurately and then you for example pick on a far point, measure the angles to work out its distance i.e. the length of the sides using Pythagoras and then you can continue from that point making more and more triangles so you can map out the whole land without doing any more distance measurement, and in the end you can then check one of the distant sides measure its actual distance, to see whether you made any mistakes.
      - This actually relies on generalisation of Pythagoras which uses the cosine rule because when you know the length of two sides and the angle between them you can work at the length of the Far Side even if the of the other angles isn't a right angle because of the cosine rule and
    - sampling frame
      - is the source material or device from which a sample is drawn. It is a list of all those within a population who can be sampled, and may include individuals, households or institutions. xrem
    - the thermodynamic entropy
      - is interpreted as being proportional to the amount of further Shannon information needed to define the detailed microscopic state of the system, that remains uncommunicated by a description solely in terms of the macroscopic variables of classical thermodynamics, with the constant of proportionality being just the [Boltzmann constant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boltzmann_constant). For example, adding heat to a system increases its thermodynamic entropy because it increases the number of possible microscopic states of the system that are consistent with the measurable values of its macroscopic variables, thus making any complete state description longer xfactoid
    - Title: Peer to peer development
      - Talking to friends during and after my recent trip to Geneva about the
      - (lack of) effectiveness of the UN system and indeed most of the big
      - institutional aid and development organisations. In spite of the best of
      - intentions, they seem to lose themselves in a vast self-serving
      - hierarchy and are too far removed from what they are supposed to be
      - changing to ever get a grip on what they are doing wrong. Is there any
      - hope for it or do we have to start all over again? Can't new
      - technologies help with peer-to-peer aid? I had a look at avaaz.org but
      - that seems to be more like a mass platform for petitions etc. Kiva.org
      - and globalgiving.org and others are approaches to peer-to-peer giving or
      - lending (microcredit). They seem very interesting, but the former seems
      - a bit tainted by having been less than clear that you don't actually
      - lend money to individual enterprises but rather to intermediate
      - microfinance organisations. These take a big cut of course. And that's
      - the rub - it is trust that is the issue and which costs so much cash.
      - But couldn't there be a way to manage peer-to-peer validation of trust
      - in the way for example ebay does? So you would know who to support
      - because they are highly rated by people you rate highly. Then I could
      - give or lend direct to people I want to help instead of giving it to,
      - say, UNICEF, who will spend it on something or other with decent
      - intentions but missing the point.
    - xfact sea level and air pressureSourceURL: http://www.smhi.se/en/theme/air-pressure-and-sea-level-1.12266Author: Steve Powell
      - The average sea level during a year is 0 cmPGA and the average air pressure is 1013 hPa. Since the air pressure normally varies between 950 and 1050 hPa during a year, the expected variation in sea level due to air pressure is between +63 cm and -37 cm around mean sea level.
    - WV.O. Quine's (1969)
      - proposal that we restrict our attention to simple imaginary universes,
      - which he calls "Democritean" universes, in honor of Democritus, the
      - most inventive of the ancient Greek atomists. A Democritean universe
      - consists of some "atoms" moving about in "space." That's all. The
      - atoms in a Democritean universe are not modern atoms full of quantum complexities but truly a-tomic (unsplittable, unsliceable) atoms,
      - tiny uniform points of matter with no parts at all, rather like those postulated by Democritus. The space they inhabit must be made ultrasimple, too, by digitizing it. Your computer screen is a good example of
      - a digitized plane, a two-dimensional array of hundreds of rows and
      - columns of tiny pixels, little squares, each of which has, at each instant,
      - one of a finite set of different colors. We want to digitize a space, a
      - three-dimensional volume, so we need cubes—voxels, in the language
      - of computer graphics. Imagine a universe composed of an infinite latticework of tiny cubical voxels, each one either utterly empty or utterly
      - full (containing exactly one atom). Each voxel has a unique location or
      - address in the latticework, given by its three spatial coordinates,
      - {x, y, z). Just as every computer color graphics system has a certain range
      - of values—different shades of color—that each pixel can take on, in a
      - Democritean universe, every voxel that isn't empty (value 0) contains
      - one of a limited number of different types of atoms. It may help to think
      - of them as different colors, such as gold, silver, black (carbon), yellow
      - (sulfur). Just as we can define the set of all possible computer-screen
      - images (for any particular pixel-color system) as the set of all permutations of fillings of the pixels with the defined colors,
    - Those "weird evolutions" enabled by a CTC, Ringbauer notes, would have remarkable practical applications, such as breaking quantum-based cryptography through the cloning of the quantum states of fundamental particles. "If you can clone quantum states,” he says, “you can violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle,” which comes in handy in quantum cryptography because the principle forbids simultaneously accurate measurements of certain kinds of paired variables, such as position and momentum. "But if you clone that system, you can measure one quantity in the first and the other quantity in the second, allowing you to decrypt an encoded message
    - How the Science of Swarms Can Help Us Fight Cancer and Predict the FutureSourceURL: http://www.wired.com/2013/03/powers-of-swarms/
      - The first thing to hit Iain Couzin when he walked into the Oxford lab where he kept his locusts was the smell, like a stale barn full of old hay. The second, third, and fourth things to hit him were locusts. The insects frequently escaped their cages and careened into the faces of scientists and lab techs. The room was hot and humid, and the constant commotion of 20,000 bugs produced a miasma of aerosolized insect exoskeleton. Many of the staff had to wear respirators to avoid developing severe allergies. “It wasn’t the easiest place to do science,” Couzin says.
