---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part28
created: 2025-12-24T20:49:24Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: cb835b0065e5
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part28.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- However, having thought long and hard over the course of a decade about what the Jesuits have told us of the life and death of the son of the Great Spirit, any Wendat could give you twenty reasons against the notion. For myself, I’ve always held that, if it were possible that God had lowered his standards sufficiently to come down to earth, he would have done it in full view of everyone, descending in triumph, with pomp and majesty, and most publicly … He would have gone from nation to nation performing mighty miracles, thus giving everyone the same laws. Then we would all have had exactly the same religion, uniformly spread and equally known throughout the four corners of the world, proving to our descendants, from then till ten thousand years into the future, the truth of this religion. Instead, there are five or six hundred religions, each distinct from the other, of which according to you, the religion of the French, alone, is any good, sainted, or — location: [1555](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1555) ^ref-24059
      - ---
      - Back in the 1930s, the anthropologist Gregory Bateson coined the term ‘schismogenesis’ to describe people’s tendency to define themselves against one another.37 Imagine two people getting into an argument about some minor political disagreement but, after an hour, ending up taking positions so intransigent that they find themselves on completely opposite sides of some ideological divide – even taking extreme positions they would never embrace under ordinary circumstances, just to show how much they completely reject the other’s points. — location: [1620](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1620) ^ref-55266
      - ---
      - What start as minor learned differences become exaggerated until women come to think of themselves as, and then increasingly actually become, everything that men are not. And, of course, men do the same thing towards women. Bateson was interested in psychological processes within societies, but there’s every reason to believe something similar happens between societies as well. — location: [1630](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1630) ^ref-9554
      - ---
      - Kandiaronk’s focus on money is typical of such situations. To this day, indigenous societies incorporated into the global economy, from Bolivia to Taiwan, almost invariably frame their own traditions, as Marshall Sahlins puts it, by opposition to the white man’s ‘living in the way of money’. — location: [1641](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1641) ^ref-24886
      - ---
      - Kandiaronk’s opinions were translated into German, English, Dutch and Italian, and continued in print, in multiple editions, for over a century. Any self-respecting intellectual of the eighteenth century would have been almost certain to have read them. — location: [1645](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1645) ^ref-13732
      - ---
      - almost yearly for the next two decades.40 Even more strikingly, just about every major French Enlightenment figure tried their hand at a Lahontan-style critique of their own society, from the perspective of some imagined outsider. Montesquieu chose a Persian; the Marquis d’Argens a Chinese; Diderot a Tahitian; Chateaubriand a Natchez; Voltaire’s L’Ingénu was half Wendat and half French. — location: [1651](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1651) ^ref-15650
      - ---
      - itself. Perhaps the single most popular work of this genre, published in 1747, was Letters of a Peruvian Woman by the prominent saloniste Madame de Graffigny, which viewed French society through the eyes of an imaginary kidnapped Inca princess. The book is considered a feminist landmark, in that it may well be the first European novel about a woman which does not end with the protagonist either marrying or dying. — location: [1660](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1660) ^ref-12967
      - ---
      - focuses on the lack of individual freedom in French society and its violent inequalities.44 But Turgot found such thinking disturbing, even dangerous. Yes, Turgot acknowledged, ‘we all love the idea of freedom and equality’ – in principle. But we must consider a larger context. In reality, he ventured, the freedom and equality of savages is not a sign of their superiority; it’s a sign of inferiority, since it is only possible in a society where each household is largely self-sufficient and, therefore, where everyone is equally poor. — location: [1676](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1676) ^ref-57905
      - ---
      - Turgot would elaborate these same ideas in a series of lectures on world history. He had already been arguing – for some years – for the primacy of technological progress as a driver for overall social improvement. In these lectures, he developed this argument into an explicit theory of stages of economic development: social evolution, he reasoned, always begins with hunters, then moves on to a stage of pastoralism, then farming, and only then finally passes to the contemporary stage of urban commercial civilization. — location: [1689](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1689) ^ref-11953
      - ---
      - But, as Rousseau is careful to emphasize, the entire parable is a way to understand what made it possible for human beings to accept the notion of private property in the first place: — location: [1767](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1767) ^ref-59712
      - ---
      - why are Europeans so competitive? Why do they not share food? Why do they submit themselves to other people’s orders? Rousseau’s long excursus on pitié – the natural sympathy that, he argues, savages have for one another and the quality that holds off the worst depredations of civilization in its second phase – only makes sense in light of the constant indigenous exclamations of dismay to be found in those books: — location: [1781](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1781) ^ref-45069
      - ---
      - To Americans like Kandiaronk, there was no contradiction between individual liberty and communism – that’s to say, communism in the sense we’ve been using it here, as a certain presumption of sharing, that people who aren’t actual enemies can be expected to respond to one another’s needs. — location: [1794](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1794) ^ref-48083
      - ---
      - European conception of individual freedom was, by contrast, tied ineluctably to notions of private property. Legally, this association traces back above all to the power of the male household head in ancient Rome, who could do whatever he liked with his chattels and possessions, including his children and slaves. — location: [1798](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1798) ^ref-49519
      - ---
      - before, in the wake of the French Revolution conservative critics blamed Rousseau for almost everything. Many held him personally responsible for the guillotine. The dream of restoring the ancient state of liberty and equality, they argued, led to exactly the effects Turgot had predicted: an Inca-style totalitarianism that could only be enforced through revolutionary terror. — location: [1814](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1814) ^ref-38786
      - ---
      - ironic that Rousseau, who began his career by taking what we would now consider an arch-conservative position – that seeming progress leads only to moral decay – would end up becoming the supreme bête noire of so many conservatives. — location: [1833](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1833) ^ref-23129
      - ---
      - that, in folding together the indigenous critique and the doctrine of progress originally developed to counter it, Rousseau did in fact write the founding document of the left as an intellectual project. — location: [1845](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1845) ^ref-26309
      - ---
      - What needs to be investigated, instead, might better be called the ‘myth of the myth of the noble savage’: why is it that certain Europeans began attributing such a naive position to others? The answer isn’t pretty. The phrase ‘noble savage’ was in fact popularized a century or so after Rousseau, as a term of ridicule and abuse. It was deployed by a clique of outright racists, who in 1859 – as the British Empire reached its height of power – took over the British Ethnological Society and called for the extermination of inferior peoples. — location: [1856](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1856) ^ref-27138
      - ---
      - Many have remarked that, to those on the receiving end, being told you are an inferior breed and that therefore anything you say can be ignored, and being told you are an innocent child of nature or the embodiment of ancient wisdom, and that therefore everything you say must be treated as ineffably profound are almost equally annoying. — location: [1897](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1897) ^ref-36804
      - ---
      - We find it difficult to picture what a truly free society would be like; perhaps they have no similar trouble picturing what arbitrary power and domination would be like. Perhaps they can not only imagine it, but consciously arrange their society in such a way as to avoid — location: [1915](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1915) ^ref-39081
      - ---
      - men and women in a given society are not only expected to perform different sorts of work, but hold different opinions about why work (or what sorts of work) is important in the first place, and therefore feel they have a higher status; or perhaps that their respective roles are so different, it makes no sense to compare them. Many of the societies encountered by the French in North America fit this description. They could be seen as matriarchal from one perspective, patriarchal from another. — location: [1942](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1942) ^ref-3298
      - ---
      - it’s not that we consider the fact that princes, judges, overseers or hereditary priests – or for that matter, writing, cities and farming – only emerge at a certain point in human history to be uninteresting or insignificant. — location: [1959](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1959) ^ref-63553
      - ---
      - reject the impulse to treat our distant ancestors as some sort of primordial human soup. — location: [1962](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=1962) ^ref-61222
      - ---
      - renowned theorist of culture W. J. T. Mitchell once remarked that dinosaurs are the quintessential modernist animal, since in Shakespeare’s time no one knew such creatures had ever existed. — location: [2000](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2000) ^ref-39149
      - ---
      - The term ‘prehistory’ only came into common use after the discoveries at Brixham Cave in Devon in 1858, when stone axes, which could only have been fashioned by humans, were found alongside remains of cave bear, woolly rhinoceros and other extinct species, all together under a sealed casing of rock. This, and subsequent archaeological findings, sparked a complete rethinking of existing evidence. Suddenly, ‘the bottom dropped out of human history.’ — location: [2007](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2007) ^ref-3927
      - ---
      - that prehistory turns out to be an extremely long period of time: more than 3 million years, during which we know our ancestors were, at least sometimes, using stone tools. For most of this period, evidence is extremely limited. — location: [2011](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2011) ^ref-7942
      - ---
