---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part30
created: 2025-12-24T20:49:48Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: d16161028def
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part30.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- It was precisely this quality that made the Nambikwara chief such a peculiarly familiar political figure: the calm sophistication with which he shifted between what were in effect two different social systems, all the while balancing a sense of personal ambition with the common good. These chiefs were in every sense self-conscious political actors. — location: [2393](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2393) ^ref-63847
      - ---
      - in the post-war decades, Lévi-Strauss was moving in exactly the opposite direction to the rest of his discipline. Where he emphasized similarities between the lives of hunters, horticulturalists and modern industrial democracies, — location: [2398](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2398) ^ref-33624
      - ---
      - landmark Man the Hunter symposium, held at the University of Chicago in 1966. This framed hunter-gatherer studies in terms of a new discipline which its attendees proposed to call ‘behavioural ecology’, starting with rigorously quantified studies of African savannah and rainforest groups – — location: [2404](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2404) ^ref-16390
      - ---
      - books like Colin Turnbull’s The Forest People. Before long, it was simply assumed by almost everyone that foragers — location: [2410](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2410) ^ref-41082
      - ---
      - represented a separate stage of social development, that they ‘live in small groups’, ‘move around a lot’, reject any social distinctions other than those of age and gender, and resolve conflicts by ‘fission’ rather than arbitration or violence.35 The fact that these African societies were, in some cases at least, refugee populations living in places no one else wanted, or that many foraging societies documented in the ethnographic record (who had by this time been largely wiped out by European settler colonialism and were thus no longer available for quantitative analysis) were nothing like this, — location: [2411](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2411) ^ref-48890
      - ---
      - quite remarkable number of these skeletons (indeed, a majority) bear evidence of striking physical anomalies that could only have marked them out, clearly and dramatically, from their social surroundings. — location: [2431](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2431) ^ref-45572
      - ---
      - Almost all the Ice Age sites with extraordinary burials and monumental architecture were created by societies that lived a little like Lévi-Strauss’s Nambikwara, dispersing into foraging bands at one time of year, gathering together in concentrated settlements at another. True, they didn’t gather to plant crops. Rather, the large Upper Palaeolithic sites are linked to migrations and seasonal hunting of game herds — location: [2461](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2461) ^ref-2990
      - ---
      - on the plain from remote corners of the British Isles at significant times of year. Careful excavation shows that many of these structures – now plausibly interpreted as monuments to the ancestors of a Neolithic aristocracy – were dismantled just a few generations after their — location: [2480](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2480) ^ref-22989
      - ---
      - On the other hand, patterns of seasonal aggregation and dispersal raise another question: if there were kings and queens at Stonehenge, exactly what sort could they have been? After all, these would have been kings whose courts and kingdoms existed for only a few months of the year, and otherwise dispersed into small communities of nut gatherers and stock herders. — location: [2500](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2500) ^ref-38525
      - ---
      - human beings were self-consciously experimenting with different social possibilities. It might be useful here to look back at this forgotten anthropological literature, with which Lévi-Strauss would have been intimately familiar, to get a sense of just how dramatic these seasonal differences might be. The key text here is Marcel Mauss and Henri Beuchat’s (1903) ‘Seasonal Variations of the Eskimo’. The authors begin by observing that the circumpolar Inuit ‘and likewise many other societies … have two social structures, one in summer and one in winter, and that in parallel they have two systems of law and religion’. — location: [2515](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2515) ^ref-9104
      - ---
      - But in the long winter months, when seals and walrus flocked to the Arctic shore, there was a dramatic reversal. Then, Inuit gathered together to build great meeting houses of wood, whale rib and stone; within these houses, virtues of equality, altruism and collective life prevailed. Wealth was shared, and husbands and wives exchanged partners under the aegis of Sedna, the Goddess of the Sea. — location: [2522](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2522) ^ref-37277
      - ---
      - To a large extent, he concluded, Inuit lived the way they did because they felt that’s how humans ought to live. — location: [2529](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2529) ^ref-5951
      - ---
      - Around the same time that Marcel Mauss was combing French libraries for everything that had ever been written about the Inuit, the German ethnologist Franz Boas was carrying out research on the Kwakiutl, indigenous hunter-gatherers of Canada’s Northwest Coast. Here, Boas discovered, it was winter – not summer – that was the time when society crystallized into its most hierarchical forms, and spectacularly so. Plank-built palaces sprang to life along the coastline of British Columbia, with hereditary nobles holding court over compatriots classified as commoners and slaves, and hosting the great banquets known as potlatch. Yet these aristocratic courts broke apart for the summer work of the fishing season, reverting to smaller clan formations – still ranked, but with entirely different and much less formal structures. In this case, people actually adopted different names in summer and winter – literally becoming someone else, depending on the time of year. — location: [2530](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2530) ^ref-62608
      - ---
      - Plains nations were one-time farmers who had largely abandoned cereal agriculture, after re-domesticating escaped Spanish horses and adopting a largely nomadic mode of life. — location: [2542](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2542) ^ref-3207
      - ---
      - late summer and early autumn, small and highly mobile bands of Cheyenne and Lakota would congregate in large settlements to make logistical preparations for the buffalo hunt. At this most sensitive time of year they appointed a police force that exercised full coercive powers, including the right to imprison, whip or fine any offender who endangered the proceedings. — location: [2543](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2543) ^ref-743
      - ---
      - that the Plains Indians were conscious political actors, keenly aware of the possibilities and dangers of authoritarian power. Not only did they dismantle all means of exercising coercive authority the moment the ritual season was over, they were also careful to rotate which clan or warrior clubs got to wield it: anyone holding sovereignty one year would be subject to the authority of others in the next. — location: [2568](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2568) ^ref-44750
      - ---
      - You can’t speak of an evolution from band to tribe to chiefdom to state if your starting points are groups that move fluidly between them as a matter of habit. — location: [2583](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2583) ^ref-48676
      - ---
      - Clastres was another product of the 1960s. A student of Lévi-Strauss, he took to heart his master’s view of Amazonian chiefs as mature political actors. But Clastres was also an anarchist (he was ultimately kicked out of Lévi-Strauss’s research group on a flimsy pretext, involving unauthorized use of official stationery), and he took the argument much further. It wasn’t just that Amazonian chiefs were calculating politicians. They were calculating politicians forced to manoeuvre in a social environment apparently designed to ensure they could never exercise real political power. — location: [2605](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2605) ^ref-15865
      - ---
      - in terms of material wealth, they were actually the poorest men in the village, since chiefs were expected constantly to give everything away. They were also expected to set an example by working much harder than everybody else. — location: [2610](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2610) ^ref-49801
      - ---
      - stateless societies were self-consciously organizing themselves to prevent the emergence of something they’d never actually experienced? There are a lot of possible ways in which to respond to this objection. Were Amazonians of centuries past, for instance, entirely unaware of the great Andean empires to their west? People used to get around. It’s unlikely they simply had no idea of developments — location: [2623](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2623) ^ref-21338
      - ---
      - The Kwakiutl were hierarchical at both times of year, but nonetheless maintained different forms of hierarchy, giving effective police powers to performers in the Midwinter Ceremonial (the ‘bear dancers’ and ‘fool dancers’) that could be exercised only during the actual performance of the ritual. At other times, aristocrats commanded great wealth but couldn’t give their followers direct orders. Many Central African forager societies are egalitarian all year round, but appear to alternate monthly between a ritual order dominated by men and another dominated by women. — location: [2649](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2649) ^ref-54073
      - ---
      - In other words, there is no single pattern. — location: [2654](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2654) ^ref-65218
      - ---
      - maybe the real question should be ‘how did we get stuck?’ How did we end up in one single mode? How did we lose that political self-consciousness, once so typical of our species? How did we come to treat eminence and subservience not as temporary expedients, or even the pomp and circumstance of some kind of grand seasonal theatre, but as inescapable elements of the human condition? — location: [2657](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2657) ^ref-10943
      - ---
      - never entirely lost. Mauss pointed out much the same thing. Seasonality is still with us – even if it is a pale, contracted shadow of its former self. In the Christian world, for instance, there is still the midwinter ‘holiday season’ in which values and forms of organization do, to a limited degree, reverse themselves: the same media and advertisers who for most of the year peddle rabid consumerist individualism suddenly start announcing that social relations are what’s really important, and that to give is better than to receive. (And in enlightened countries like Mauss’s France, there’s also the summer grandes vacances in which everybody downs tools for a month and flees the cities.) — location: [2662](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2662) ^ref-43761
      - ---
