---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part29
created: 2025-12-24T20:49:38Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: dabb408c3e2b
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part29.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- Rather than everyone starting out the same, then dispersing from East Africa in some Tower-of-Babel moment to become the diverse nations and peoples of the earth, early human populations in Africa appear to have been far more physically diverse than anything we are familiar with today. — location: [2026](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2026) ^ref-30711
      - ---
      - Not only do we look the same, in many ways we act the same as well (for instance, everywhere from the Australian outback to Amazonia, rolling one’s eyes is a way of saying ‘what an idiot!’). The same applies to cognition. — location: [2033](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2033) ^ref-49244
      - ---
      - no human language, for instance, that doesn’t have nouns, verbs and adjectives; and while humans may enjoy very different forms of music and dance, there’s no known human population that does not enjoy music and dancing at all. Rewind a few hundred millennia and all this was most definitely not the case. For most of our evolutionary history, we did indeed live in Africa – but not just the eastern savannahs, as previously thought: our biological ancestors were distributed everywhere from Morocco to the Cape.3 Some of those populations remained isolated from each another for tens or even hundreds of thousands of years, cut off from their nearest relatives by deserts and rainforests. Strong regional traits developed.4 The result probably would have struck a modern observer as something more akin to a world inhabited by hobbits, giants and elves — location: [2036](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2036) ^ref-12153
      - ---
      - Perhaps the only thing we can say with real certainty is that, in terms of ancestry, we are all Africans. Modern humans first appeared in Africa. When they began expanding out of Africa into Eurasia, they encountered other populations such as Neanderthals and Denisovans – less different, but still different – and these various groups interbred.6 Only after those other populations became extinct can we really begin talking about a single, human ‘us’ inhabiting the planet. — location: [2055](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2055) ^ref-4572
      - ---
      - Consider the first direct evidence of what we’d now call complex symbolic human behaviour, or simply ‘culture’. Currently, it dates back no more than 100,000 years. — location: [2083](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2083) ^ref-63497
      - ---
      - Much of the evidence for this ‘revolution’ is restricted to a single part of the world: Europe, where it is associated with replacement of Neanderthals by Homo sapiens around 40,000 — location: [2094](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2094) ^ref-43572
      - ---
      - Even as we write, a cave site on the coast of Kenya called Panga ya Saidi is yielding evidence of shell beads and worked pigments stretching back 60,000 years;14 and research on the islands of Borneo and Sulawesi is opening vistas on to an unsuspected world of cave art, many thousands of years older than the famous images of Lascaux and Altamira, on the other side of Eurasia.15 No doubt still earlier examples of complex pictorial art will one day be found somewhere on the continent of Africa. — location: [2111](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2111) ^ref-2461
      - ---
      - societies that resulted in what archaeologists call the Upper Palaeolithic period (roughly 50,000–15,000 BC) – with their ‘princely’ burials and grand communal buildings – seem to completely defy our image of a world made up of tiny egalitarian forager bands. — location: [2128](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2128) ^ref-51875
      - ---
      - what makes societies distinctively human is our ability to make the conscious decision not to act that way. Carefully working through ethnographic accounts of existing egalitarian foraging bands in Africa, South America and Southeast Asia, Boehm identifies a whole panoply of tactics collectively employed to bring would-be braggarts and bullies down to earth – ridicule, shame, shunning (and in the case of inveterate sociopaths, sometimes even outright assassination)19 – none of which have any parallel among other primates. — location: [2139](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2139) ^ref-29303
      - ---
      - IN WHICH WE OBSERVE HOW GRAND MONUMENTS, PRINCELY BURIALS AND OTHER UNEXPECTED FEATURES OF ICE AGE SOCIETIES HAVE UPENDED OUR ASSUMPTIONS OF WHAT HUNTER-GATHERERS ARE LIKE, AND CONSIDER WHAT IT MIGHT MEAN TO SAY THERE WAS ‘SOCIAL STRATIFICATION’ SOME 30,000 YEARS AGO — location: [2164](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2164) ^ref-27794
      - ---
      - monumental architecture. In Eurasia, the most famous examples are the stone temples of the Germuş Mountains, overlooking the Harran Plain in southeast Turkey. In the 1990s, German archaeologists, working on the plain’s northern frontier, began uncovering extremely ancient remains at a place known locally as Göbekli Tepe.25 What they found has since come to be regarded as an evolutionary conundrum. The main source of puzzlement is a group of twenty megalithic enclosures, initially raised there around 9000 BC, and then repeatedly modified over many centuries. — location: [2192](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2192) ^ref-1177
      - ---
      - While Göbekli Tepe is often presented as an anomaly, there is in fact a great deal of evidence for monumental construction of different sorts among hunter-gatherers in earlier periods, extending back into the Ice Age. In Europe, between 25,000 and 12,000 years ago public works were already a feature of human habitation across an area reaching from Kraków to Kiev. — location: [2219](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2219) ^ref-46497
      - ---
      - what are we to make of all this evidence for stone temples, princely burials, mammoth monuments and bustling centres of trade and craft production, stretching back far into the Ice Age? What are they doing there, in a Palaeolithic world where – at least on some accounts – nothing much is ever supposed to have happened, and human societies can best be understood by analogy with troops of chimps or bonobos? Unsurprisingly, perhaps, some have responded by completely abandoning the idea of an egalitarian Golden Age, concluding instead that this must have been a society dominated by powerful leaders, even dynasties — location: [2240](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2240) ^ref-13502
      - ---
      - Instead, over tens of thousands of years, we see monuments and magnificent burials, but little else to indicate the growth of ranked societies, let alone anything remotely resembling ‘states’. — location: [2249](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2249) ^ref-49346
      - ---
      - IN WHICH WE DISPOSE OF LINGERING ASSUMPTIONS THAT ‘PRIMITIVE’ FOLK WERE SOMEHOW INCAPABLE OF CONSCIOUS REFLECTION, AND DRAW ATTENTION TO THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF ECCENTRICITY — location: [2252](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2252) ^ref-59640
      - ---
      - When we are capable of self-awareness, it’s usually for very brief periods of time: the ‘window of consciousness’, during which we can hold a thought or work out a problem, tends to be open on average for roughly seven seconds. What neuroscientists (and it must be said, most contemporary philosophers) almost never notice, however, is that the great exception to this is when we’re talking to someone else. In conversation, we can hold thoughts and reflect on problems sometimes for hours on end. This is of course why so often, even if we’re trying to figure something out by ourselves, we imagine arguing with or explaining it to someone else. — location: [2277](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2277) ^ref-63926
      - ---
      - whether they were in China, India or Greece, they tended to write their books in the form of dialogues. Humans were only fully self-conscious when arguing with one another, trying to sway each other’s views, or working out a common problem. True individual self-consciousness, meanwhile, was imagined as something that a few wise sages could perhaps achieve through long study, exercise, discipline and meditation. — location: [2283](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2283) ^ref-34768
      - ---
      - Victorian intellectuals, the notion of people self-consciously imagining a social order more to their liking and then trying to bring it into being was simply not applicable before the modern age – and most were deeply divided as to whether it would even be a good idea in their own time. — location: [2295](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2295) ^ref-10337
      - ---
      - as they pretended a ‘rational Western individual’ (say, a British train guard or French colonial official) could be assumed to be fully self-aware all the time (a clearly absurd assumption), they argued that anyone classified as a ‘primitive’ or ‘savage’ operated with a ‘pre-logical mentality’, or lived in a mythological dreamworld. At best, they were mindless conformists, bound in the shackles of tradition; at worst, they were incapable of fully conscious, critical thought of any kind. — location: [2302](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2302) ^ref-15169
      - ---
      - But they are still caught in the same Turgot-like evolutionary straitjacket, their place in history defined by their mode of subsistence, and their role blindly to enact some abstract law of development which we understand but they do not; — location: [2317](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2317) ^ref-5854
      - ---
      - There is every reason to believe that sceptics and non-conformists exist in every human society; what varies is how others react to them. — location: [2335](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2335) ^ref-25112
      - ---
      - these were seriously unorthodox people. The impression one gets from the literature is that any Nuer settlement of pre-colonial times was likely to be complemented by a minor penumbra of what might be termed extreme individuals; ones who in our own society would likely be classified as anything from highly eccentric or defiantly queer to neurodivergent or mentally ill. Normally, prophets were treated with bemused respect. They were ill; but the illness was a direct consequence of being touched by God. — location: [2350](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2350) ^ref-18150
      - ---
      - Claude Lévi-Strauss is one of the few mid-twentieth-century anthropologists to take seriously the idea that early humans were our intellectual equals; hence his famous argument in The Savage Mind that mythological thought, rather than representing some sort of pre-logical haze, is better conceived as a kind of ‘neolithic science’ — location: [2360](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2360) ^ref-31268
      - ---
      - The Nambikwara then had a reputation as extremely simple folk, given their very rudimentary material culture. For this reason, many treated them almost as a direct window on to the Palaeolithic. This, Lévi-Strauss pointed out, was a mistake. People like the Nambikwara live in the shadow of the modern state, — location: [2365](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2365) ^ref-35724
      - ---
      - How should we think about these chiefs? They were not patriarchs, Lévi-Strauss concluded; neither were they petty tyrants (even though for certain limited periods they were allowed to act as such); and there was no sense in which they were invested with mystical powers. — location: [2386](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=2386) ^ref-30765
      - ---
