---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part25
created: 2025-12-24T20:48:51Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: df31010a434b
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part25.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- all familiar with the Christian answer: people once lived in a state of innocence, yet were tainted by original sin. We desired to be godlike and have been punished for it; now we live in a fallen state while hoping for future redemption. Today, the popular version of this story is typically some updated variation on Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s  #kk
        - Discourse on the Origin and the Foundation of Inequality Among Mankind, which he wrote in  #kk
          - 1754. Once upon a time, the story goes, we were hunter-gatherers, living in a prolonged state of childlike innocence, in tiny bands. These bands were egalitarian; they could be for the very reason that they were so small. It was only after the ‘Agricultural Revolution’, and then still more the rise of cities, that this happy condition came to an end, ushering in ‘civilization’ and ‘the state’ — location: [642]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=642](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=642)) ^ref-44268
      - ---
      - The problem is that anyone seeking an alternative to this rather depressing view of history will quickly find that the only one on offer is actually even worse: if not Rousseau, then  #kk
        - Thomas Hobbes. — location: [653]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=653](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=653)) ^ref-17711
      - ---
      - There’s a reason why, in English, the words ‘politics’ ‘polite’ and ‘police’ all sound the same – they’re all derived from the Greek word polis, or city, the Latin equivalent of which is civitas, which also gives us ‘civility,’ ‘civic’ and a certain modern understanding of ‘civilization’. — location: [660]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=660](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=660)) ^ref-56359
      - ---
      - As the reader can probably detect from our tone, we don’t much like the choice between these two alternatives. Our objections can be classified into three broad categories. As accounts of the general course of human history, they: simply aren’t true; have dire political implications; make the past needlessly dull. This book is an attempt to begin to tell another, more hopeful and more interesting story; — location: [669]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=669](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=669)) ^ref-41468
      - ---
      - To give just a sense of how different the emerging picture is: it is clear now that human societies before the advent of farming were not confined to small, egalitarian bands. On the contrary, the world of hunter-gatherers as it existed before the coming of agriculture  #kk
        - was one of bold social experiments, resembling a carnival parade of political forms, far more than it does the drab abstractions of evolutionary theory. 
      - Agriculture, in turn, did not mean  #kkk
        - the inception of private property, nor did it mark an irreversible step towards inequality. In fact, many of the first farming communities were relatively free of ranks and hierarchies. 
      - And far from setting class differences in stone, a surprising number of the world’s earliest cities  #kk
        - were organized on robustly egalitarian lines, with no need for authoritarian rulers, ambitious warrior-politicians, or even bossy administrators. — location: [677]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=677](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=677)) ^ref-56186
      - ---
      - Revisiting what we will call the ‘indigenous critique’ means taking seriously contributions to social thought that come from outside the European canon, and in particular from those indigenous peoples whom Western philosophers tend to cast either in the role of  #kkkk
        - history’s angels or its devils. Both positions preclude any real possibility of intellectual exchange, or even dialogue: — location: [698]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=698](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=698)) ^ref-50738
      - ---
      - First of all, it’s bizarre to imagine that, say, during the roughly 10,000 (some would say more like 20,000) years in which people painted on the walls of Altamira, no one – not only in Altamira, but anywhere on earth – experimented with alternative forms of social organization. What’s the chance of that? Second of all, is not the capacity to experiment with different forms of social organization itself a quintessential part of what makes us human? That is, beings with the capacity for self-creation, even freedom? — location: [750]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=750](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=750)) ^ref-43708
      - ---
      - Let’s consider a fairly random example of one of these generalist accounts, Francis Fukuyama’s The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution (2011). Here is Fukuyama on what he feels can be taken as received wisdom about early human societies:  #kkk
        - ‘In its early stages human political organization is similar to the band-level society observed in higher primates like chimpanzees,’ which Fukuyama suggests can be regarded as ‘a default form of social organization’. He then goes on to assert that Rousseau was largely correct — location: [770]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=770](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=770)) ^ref-41105
      - ---
      - As we will soon be discovering, there is simply no reason to believe that small-scale groups are especially likely to be  #kk
        - egalitarian – or, conversely, that large ones must necessarily have kings, presidents or even bureaucracies. Statements like these are just so many prejudices dressed up as facts, or even as laws of history. — location: [803]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=803](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=803)) ^ref-46514
      - ---
      - what Rousseau presented was more of a  #kkk
        - parable, — location: [816]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=816](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=816)) ^ref-46365
        - His imaginary State of Nature was primarily invoked as a way of illustrating the point. True, he didn’t invent the concept: as a rhetorical device, the State of Nature had already been used in European philosophy for a century. — location: [822]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=822](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=822)) ^ref-19470
      - ---
      - Pinker, though, is confident that an objective statistical analysis, shorn of sentiment, will show us to be living in an age of unprecedented peace and security. And this, he suggests, is the logical outcome of living in sovereign states, each with a monopoly over the legitimate use of violence within its borders, — location: [845]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=845](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=845)) ^ref-27080
      - ---
      - When archaeologists undertake balanced appraisals of hunter-gatherer burials from the Palaeolithic, they find high frequencies of health-related disabilities – but also surprisingly high levels of care until the time of death (and beyond, since some of these funerals were remarkably lavish). — location: [867]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=867](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=867)) ^ref-32120
      - ---
      - those working in the tradition of Rousseau tend to prefer  #kkk
        - African foragers like  #kkkk
          - the Hadza, Pygmies or !Kung. 
      - Those who follow Hobbes prefer the  #kkk
        - Yanomami. The Yanomami are an indigenous population who live largely by growing plantains and cassava in the Amazon rainforest, their traditional homeland, on the border of southern Venezuela and northern Brazil. Since the 1970s, the Yanomami have acquired a reputation as the quintessential violent savages: ‘fierce people’, — location: [879]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=879](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=879)) ^ref-16403
      - ---
      - in fact, statistics show the Yanomani are  #kkk
        - not particularly violent – compared with other Amerindian groups, Yanomami homicide rates turn out average-to-low. — location: [884]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=884](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=884)) ^ref-16568
      - ---
      - We should be fair to Chagnon (not everyone is). He never claimed the Yanomami should be treated as living remnants of the Stone Age; indeed, he often noted that they obviously weren’t. — location: [890]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=890](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=890)) ^ref-8578
      - ---
      - The idea that our current ideals of freedom, equality and democracy are somehow products of the ‘Western tradition’ would in fact have come as an enormous surprise to someone like Voltaire. As we’ll soon see, the Enlightenment thinkers who propounded such ideals almost invariably  #kkk
        - put them in the mouths of foreigners, even ‘savages’ like the Yanomami. This is hardly surprising, since it’s almost impossible to find a single author in that Western tradition, from Plato to Marcus Aurelius to Erasmus, who did not make it clear that they would have been opposed to such ideas. The word ‘democracy’ might have been invented in Europe (barely, since Greece at the time was much closer culturally to North Africa and the Middle East than it was to, say, England), but it’s almost impossible to find a single European author before the nineteenth century who suggested it would be anything other than a terrible form of government. — location: [913]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=913](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=913)) ^ref-56299
      - ---
      - About the only dependable way anyone has ever discovered to determine whether one way of living is really more satisfying, fulfilling, happy or otherwise preferable to any other is to allow people to fully experience both, give them a choice, then watch what they actually do. For instance, if Pinker is correct, then any sane person who had to choose between (a) the violent chaos and abject poverty of the ‘tribal’ stage in human development and (b) the relative security and prosperity of Western civilization would not hesitate to leap for safety. But empirical data is available here, and it suggests something is very wrong with Pinker’s conclusions. — location: [940]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=940](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=940)) ^ref-33092
      - ---
      - Let us consider the case of Helena Valero, a Brazilian woman born into a family of Spanish descent, whom Pinker mentions as a ‘white girl’ abducted by Yanomami in 1932 while travelling with her parents along the remote Rio Dimití. For two decades, Valero lived with a series of Yanomami families, marrying twice, and eventually achieving a position of some importance in her community. Pinker briefly cites the account Valero later gave of her own life, where she describes the brutality of a Yanomami raid. — location: [948]([kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=948](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B08WCL3V7Q&location=948)) ^ref-53952
      - ---
