---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part09
created: 2025-12-24T20:45:11Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: df96356f37a1
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part09.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- “The adaptation of the rules of the symbolism to the processes of deduction aids the intuition in regions too abstract for the imagination readily to present to the mind the true relation between the ideas employed. For various collocations of symbols become familiar as representing important collocations of ideas; and in turn the possible relations — according to the rules of the symbolism — between these collocations of symbols become familiar, and these further collocations represent still more complicated relations between the abstract ideas. And thus the mind is finally led to construct trains of reasoning in regions of thought in which the imagination would be entirely unable to sustain itself without symbolic help.”
    - Loc. cit.Thinking is difficult, and symbolization allows us to — mechanically — extend thinking into regions where thinking alone, without symbolic aid, would not be capable of penetrating. But that doesn’t mean symbolic thinking is easy. Elsewhere Russell develops another rationalization for symbolization:
    - “The fact is that symbolism is useful because it makes things difficult. (This is not true of the advanced parts of mathematics, but only of the beginnings.) What we wish to know is, what can be deduced from what. Now, in the beginnings, everything is self- evident; and it is very hard to see whether one self- evident proposition follows from another or not. Obviousness is always the enemy to correctness. Hence we invent some new and difficult symbolism, in which nothing seems obvious. Then we set up certain rules for operating on the symbols, and the whole thing becomes mechanical. In this way we find out what must be taken as premiss and what can be demonstrated or defined.”
    - Bertrand Russell, Mysticism and Logic, “Mathematics and the Metaphysicians”Russell formulated the difficulty of thinking even more strongly in a later passage:
    - “There is a good deal of importance to philosophy in the theory of symbolism, a good deal more than at one time I thought. I think the importance is almost entirely negative, i.e., the importance lies in the fact that unless you are fairly self conscious about symbols, unless you are fairly aware of the relation of the symbol to what it symbolizes, you will find yourself attributing to the thing properties which only belong to the symbol. That, of course, is especially likely in very abstract studies such as philosophical logic, because the subject-matter that you are supposed to be thinking of is so exceedingly difficult and elusive that any person who has ever tried to think about it knows you do not think about it except perhaps once in six months for half a minute. The rest of the time you think about the symbols, because they are tangible, but the thing you are supposed to be thinking about is fearfully difficult and one does not often manage to think about it. The really good philosopher is the one who does once in six months think about it for a minute. Bad philosophers never do.”
    - Bertrand Russell, Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901-1950, 1956, “The Philosophy of Logical Atomism,” I. “Facts and Propositions,” p. 185Alfred North Whitehead, coauthor of Principia Mathematica, made a similar point more colorfully than Russell, which I recently in [The Algorithmization of the World](http://geopolicraticus.tumblr.com/post/70570242540/the-algorithmization-of-the-world):
    - “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copy-books and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them. Operations of thought are like cavalry charges in a battle: they are strictly limited in number, they require fresh horses, and must only be made at decisive moments.”
    - Alfred North Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics, London: WILLIAMS & NORGATE, Chap. V, pp. 45-46This quote from Whitehead follows a lesser known passage from the same work:
    - “…by the aid of symbolism, we can make transitions in reasoning almost mechanically by the eye, which otherwise would call into play the higher faculties of the brain.”
    - Alfred North Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics, London: WILLIAMS & NORGATE, Chap. V, pp. 45In other words, the brain is saved effort by mechanizing as much reason as can be mechanized. Of course, not everyone is capable of these kinds of mechanical deductions made possible by mathematical logic, which is especially difficult.
    - Recent scholarship has only served to underscore the difficulty of thinking, and the steps we must take to facilitate our thinking. Daniel Kahneman in particular has focused on the physiology effort involved in thinking. In his book Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman distinguishes between two cognitive systems, which he calls System 1 and System 2, which are, respectively, that faculty of the mind that responds immediately, on an intuitive or instinctual level, and that faculty of the mind that proceeds more methodically, according to rules:
    - Why call them System 1 and System 2 rather than the more descriptive “automatic system” and “effortful system”? The reason is simple: “Automatic system” takes longer to say than “System 1” and therefore takes more space in your working memory. This matters, because anything that occupies your working memory reduces your ability to think. You should treat “System 1” and “System 2” as nicknames, like Bob and Joe, identifying characters that you will get to know over the course of this book. The fictitious systems make it easier for me to think about judgment and choice, and will make it easier for you to understand what I say.
    - Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, Part I, Chap. 1While such concerns do not appear to have explicitly concerned Russell, Russell’s concern for economy of thought implicitly embraced this idea. One’s ability to think must be facilitated in any way possible, including the shortening of names — in purely formal thought, symbolization dispenses with names altogether and contents itself with symbols only, usually introduced as letters.
    - Modern perspectives on cognitive psychology generally address cognition as a dual process theory, expounded upon by Daniel Kahneman in 2011.[26]From [Cognitive psychology - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_psychology)
    - Theorymaker People for Cooperation
      - marketing and promotion for Theorymaker Crowd and OneQuestion
        - [OM] Re: computer aided qualitative data analysis programs - [steve@pogol.net](mailto:steve@pogol.net) - Steve Powell Mail
        - [https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#label/steve%40proMENTE.org/FMfcgxwBVWRWJdTfhJQQdLlwTRnHzqbc](https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#label/steve%40proMENTE.org/FMfcgxwBVWRWJdTfhJQQdLlwTRnHzqbc)
      - Lea Networked planet
      - Jindra from valuingvoices was very nice on skype
      - Pat McGinn <[pmcginn@john-lewis.com](mailto:pmcginn@john-lewis.com)>
    - Conferences
      - EES - resilient societies. [http://www.ees2018.eu/abstract-submission-guidelines.htm](http://www.ees2018.eu/abstract-submission-guidelines.htm).
        - COMMENTS ON RICK'S PAPER
        - workshop !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
        - Value in Theories of Change
        - EES panel??
          - sara - complexity https://realtimeboard.com/app/board/o9J_kz8R-aE=/
          - discuss a standard format for evaluation references with Sarah in Greece which you can then get the referee just to check
          - EES workshop!
          - PEOPLE XPPL
            - actually Melvin Mark is psych / phil / values ... AEA, EES2018
            - Estelle Raimondo, very detailed qca, world Bank
              - 
                - Estelle Raimondo [Estelle Raimondo, very detailed qca, world Bank](https://workflowy.com/#/0be8426f8099) 
          - xppl people aea
          - rick davies?
          - zejnep at ees
          - Steve Wallis steve wallis <[swallis@sbcglobal.net](mailto:swallis@sbcglobal.net)>
          - the dutch guy?
          - have a look at linkedIn threads.
          - sara vaca
          - http://stephanieevergreen.com/graphic-recording/
          - dana wanzer http://danawanzer.com/2018/01/logicmodel-eval17/
          - doview. Paul duignan - NZ
          - [Ruud Kramer](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rukramer)
          - xplane http://xblog.xplane.com/visual-thinking-sketch-notes - good summary of visual alphabet
        - booked ees accomm
        - Strand 2: Rethinking Evaluation methods and methodologies
        - also, a reslience paper!
      - UKES0
      - UKES1
      - UKES
      - Theorymaker AEA
        - aea washington eval2017
          - AIMS
            - guest blogs for theorymaker.info
          - People at aea
            - The theories of eval TIG, said I'd volunteer - webmaster - Cory -
            - Kruno
          - aea acceptance by August 18th - [education@eval.org](mailto:education@eval.org)
          - eval emails
            - one
            - Evaluation 2017 - Session ID: $sessnum
            - Sent: July 28, 2017 - 06:30 PM
            - From: Evaluation 2017 <[education@eval.org](mailto:education@eval.org)>
            - Hello $fname $lname,
            - We are pleased to inform you that your paper has been grouped into the following multipaper session: $sessname. This session has been accepted for Evaluation 2017, taking place November 6-11 in Washington, DC. You are receiving this email because you are listed as either a session chair, discussant, or presenter in the above mentioned multipaper session.
            - This session will take place:
            - $timeslotinfo*
            - *Although we try to minimize unnecessary changes, please note that session times are subject to change.
            - Registration: All accepted presenters have access to our online registration system: http://www.evaluationconference.org/p/cm/ld/fid=503. All attendees are required to register for the meeting, so register today!
            - As you prepare your presentations, make sure you visit http://p2i.eval.org to browse all of the presenter tools available, including the Presentation Preparation Checklist.
            - Please review the other papers being presented in your session using our agenda builder tool on the AEA website: http://www.evaluationconference.org/p/cm/ld/fid=505. All multipaper sessions with three or fewer papers will have a total of 45 minutes for all presentations, while all multipaper sessions with four or more papers will have a total of either 60 or 90 minutes. Please be in touch with your session chair to discuss the logistics of these multipaper sessions.
            - If you have any questions regarding this email, please email [education@eval.org](mailto:education@eval.org). In accordance with the AEA Management Standards, please allow up to five business days for a response due to the increased volume of email inquiries during the session acceptance time frame. Unfortunately, specific schedule requests that were not expressed upon initial submission cannot be accommodated. General Evaluation 2017 questions not specifically related to your presentation can be emailed to [info@eval.org](mailto:info@eval.org).
            - Congratulations! We look forward to seeing you in DC!
            - two
            - Evaluation 2017 - Session ID: $sessnum
            - Sent: July 27, 2017 - 10:45 PM
            - From: Evaluation 2017 <[education@eval.org](mailto:education@eval.org)>
            - Dear $fname $lname,
