---
title: 20251224t204302z-ideas-part46
created: 2025-12-24T20:53:23Z
tags: source, verbatim
importance: 0
source: sources_ingest
source_id: fb632effa51a
original_path: pasted/20251224t204302z_ideas_part46.md
source_set: ideas

source_set_context: things i am learning like social science etc
---

- plastic production accounts for $400 billion a year in offsetting revenue – an amount expected to triple by 2050,11 securing the oil industry’s survival. There are some meaningful actions we can take as consumers: primarily, travelling less and differently (especially by ceasing to fly), and switching to a plant-based diet. But in most other sectors, it scarcely matters how green you think you are. #kkk
        - the main driver of a person’s environmental impact is not their attitude. It is not their mode of consumption, or the particular choices they make.12 It’s their money.13 If people have surplus money, they spend
    - While you might persuade yourself that you are a green mega-consumer, in reality you are just a mega-consumer. This is why the environmental impacts of the very rich, however eco-friendly they may appear to be, are massively greater than those of everyone else.14
    - reached 94 per cent.2 It issued war bonds. It borrowed massively. Between 1940 and 1945, total government spending rose roughly tenfold. Astonishingly, the US government spent more money (in current dollar terms) between 1942 and 1945 than #kkk
      - it had between 1789 and 1941.3 From 1940 to 1944, its military budget rose by a factor of forty-two, outstripping the budgets of Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom put together.
    - From 1942 until 1945 the manufacture of cars was banned.9 So were new household appliances and even the construction of new homes. Tyres and gasoline were strictly rationed; meat, butter, sugar, clothes and shoes were also limited. Rationing was considered fairer than taxing scarce goods: it ensured everyone received an equal share. A national speed limit of 35mph was imposed, to save fuel. Posters warned people ‘When you ride ALONE, you ride with Hitler! Join a car-sharing club TODAY’,10 and asked ‘Is this trip really necessary?’11 They cautioned: ‘Waste helps the enemy: conserve material’. Americans were urged to sign the Consumer’s Victory Pledge: ‘I will buy carefully; I will take good care of the things I have; I will waste nothing.’12 Every imaginable material – chewing-gum wrappers, rubber bands, used cooking fat – was recycled.
    - narratives #kkk
      - Disorder afflicts the land, caused by powerful and nefarious forces working against the interests of humanity. But the hero or heroes will rise up and revolt against this disorder, do battle with those powerful forces and, against all odds, emerge victorious to restore harmony to the land. This is a familiar narrative structure. It’s the plot we follow in the New Testament, in the Harry Potter books, in Lord of the Rings, in Narnia.
    - So our new Restoration Story #kkkkk
      - : Disorder afflicts the land, caused by the powerful and nefarious forces of people who tell us that our highest purpose in life is to fight like stray dogs over a dustbin. But the heroes of the story, the common people long deprived of the democratic power we were promised, will revolt against this disorder. We will fight those nefarious forces by building rich, engaging, collaborative, inclusive and generous communities. In doing so, we will restore harmony to the land. Our task is to tell the story that will light the path to a better world.
    - richer conceptions of democracy have been proposed. One such model has been described by the late Murray Bookchin, #kkkkk
      - an American foundryman, autoworker and shop steward who became a professor in the field he helped to develop: social ecology. In his book The Next Revolution,1 he makes a crucial distinction between statecraft and politics. He sees the state as a force for domination, and statecraft as the means by which it is sustained. Politics, by contrast, is ‘the active engagement of free citizens’ in their own affairs. He sees the municipality (village, town or city) as the place in which we first began to explore our common humanity. This is the arena in which we can now build the foundations of ‘a truly free and ecological society’. Unlike classical anarchists, Bookchin proposes a structured and hyper-democratic political system,
    - His approach became a major inspiration in #kkkkk
      - the autonomous region in north-eastern Syria widely known as Rojava.2 After local people defeated the ISIL terrorists and the Syrian government withdrew its troops to fight its civil war elsewhere, from 2012 the Rojavans took the chance to build their own politics. Under extraordinarily difficult circumstances, they created a politics in which people have more freedom and control than anywhere in the surrounding regions. It is by no means a perfect republic, but through deliberative democracy – drawing citizens together to discuss and solve their predicaments in person – its people have succeeded in putting Bookchin’s ideas to work on a level that many had dismissed as impossible.
      - A classic example is the practice of ‘==participatory budgeting’ in Porto Alegre, southern Brazil==. During its peak years (1989–2004), before the system was curtailed by a more hostile local government, it transformed the life of the city.3 Over
      - more distributive than those the city government had previously made. Programmes like Porto Alegre’s have stimulated experimentation around ‘Citizen’s Assemblies’ and other forms of deliberative democracy. ==Similar political projects (although not as far reaching) have been adopted in Taiwan (‘vTaiwan’),5 Madrid (‘Decide Madrid’),6 Barcelona (‘Decidim Barcelona’),7 Lisbon (‘Lisboa Participa’),8 Brussels (‘the G1000 Citizen’s Summit’),9 Melbourne (‘Future Melbourne’),10 Finland (‘Open Ministry’),11 and Seoul (participatory budgeting)==
    - of private sufficiency, public luxury.
    - The commons is neither market nor state, capitalism nor Communism. It is defined by David Bollier and Silke Helfrich in their book Free, Fair, and Alive as ‘a social form that enables people to enjoy freedom without repressing others, enact fairness without bureaucratic control … and assert sovereignty without nationalism’.2 The commons are controlled by communities, which devise and implement the rules that govern them.
    - After the War, everyone became a member of the Resistance.
  - USA
    - In the 1930s, the last time the far right was so powerful in western democracies, one of the few centre-left governments that survived was #kkkk
    - in the US, led by Franklin D Roosevelt. Its expansive New Deal policies, distant antecedents of the boldest Labour legislation announced in the king’s speech this week, were crucial to Roosevelt’s success, but so was his rhetoric. In a celebrated 1936 presidential election speech, he said that the forces of “organised money” and the “organised mob” were “unanimous in their hate for me - and I welcome their hatred”. He was re-elected. Starmer may need to be much fiercer towards the populists if he is to manage the same.
    - Despite his own underclass to upper-class personal story, Vance is also wary of too much social mobility, which implies movement not only “to a theoretically better life” but also “away from something” that is socially significant. What Vance means is that dignity for workers requires them to know their station in life.
      - It’s an argument fleshed out by the political philosopher Patrick Deneen, #kkk
        - from whom conservatives such as Vance and Hawley draw intellectual sustenance. For Deneen, class distinctions are the foundations of social order. Ordinary people, he writes in his book Regime Change, are more likely than the elites “to be grounded in the realities of a world of limits” but cannot be entrusted with too much liberty.
        - What is needed, rather, is an elite capable, unlike now, of inculcating the lower orders with an “understanding of what constitutes their own good” and ensuring, through cultural and religious constraints, that they don’t tumble into degeneracy. This Deneen calls “==aristopopulism ==– populism with a feudal touch”.
        - All these themes – 
          - elite politicians presenting as authentic working-class voices; 
          - poverty understood in terms of morality and culture; 
          - the demand for culture and tradition to act as guardrails for ordinary people; 
          - the desire for a more disciplined society portrayed as a critique of liberal elites – 
          - are found not just in the Republican party but are common to rightwing populists in Europe, too, from Nigel Farage’s Reform UK to Giorgia Meloni’s Brothers of Italy
    - Vance in 2021 told Jack Murphy, a controversial “manosphere” figure: “A lot of conservatives have said we should … basically eliminate the administrative state. And I’m sympathetic to that project.
      - “But another option is that we should just seize the administrative state for our own purposes. We should fire all of the people. I think Trump … [will] probably win again in 2024, and he’ll win by a margin such that he’ll be the president of the United States in January of 2025.
      - “I think what Trump should do, if I was giving him one piece of advice: fire every single mid-level bureaucrat. Every civil servant in the administrative state.
      - “Replace them with our people, and ==when the courts – because you will get taken to court … stop you, stand before the country like [president] Andrew Jackson did, and say, ‘The chief justice has made his ruling. Now let him enforce it.’==”
      - As Beauchamp noted, the Jackson quote “is likely apocryphal, but the history is real”.#kkk
        - An 1832 supreme court ruling said the government should respect Native American land rights. Jackson simply ignored it. The result was the forcible displacement of 60,000 people, an outrage known as the ==Trail of Tears==.
    - trump
      - Trump has famously been a drag on his own business career. #kkk
        - He would have been richer today had he simply put his inheritance into an index tracker fund
  - Europe
    - [There’s a hard-right tidal wave about to hit Europe – and it will only make the economic crisis worse | Gordon Brown | The Guardian - theguardian.com](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/apr/29/hard-right-tidal-wave-europe-economic-crisis-worse)
      - "who now see life as a zero-sum game.

The latter is a mindset that, recognising the economic pie is not growing, #kkk
        - leads people to an erroneous conclusion: “I will only do well if someone else does badly.” Once embraced, this adversarial view is hard to shake.

The supporting evidence is clear: in the largest western European countries, many people are pessimistic about their prospects, believing that their generation will do worse than their parents. #kkk
          - Only 26% of French people and just 33% of Italians think they will do better in future, according to a seven-nation poll by Focaldata. In the Netherlands and Germany, as many are pessimistic as optimistic. While Ireland and Sweden top the league for optimism, only 46% and 40% respectively feel they will fare better, with 39% and 35% taking the opposite view. In no country are a majority of people optimistic about their future.

The pollsters also tested the classic zero-sum proposition that you can only get rich at the expense of others. In every major European country, the results are dramatic: 59% of British respondents believe #kkk
            - they can only enhance their personal wealth if others do badly, and just 17% disregarded this notion. Similarly, in Germany and the Netherlands, 60% and 58% respectively hold this view, compared with only 16% and 15% who rejected it. In almost all countries, more than 50% displayed a zero-sum mentality."
  - UK
